 Scheme of
    Letting
  Priorities

                 July 2017

    Adopted by Galway City Council on the 10th July 2017
    Amendments and Additions agreed by Council on the 9th April 2018
Further amendments and Additions agreed by Council on the 1st July 2020
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section                                                       Page No.
                                                                 3
1. Introduction                                                  4
                                                                 4
2. Scope                                                         8
                                                                 8
3. General                                                       9
                                                                 11
4. Reservation of Dwellings                                      12
                                                                 13
5. Matters Disregarded
                                                                  14
6. Deferral or Refusal of Applications                            16
                                                                  17
7. Refusal by Applicants of Offers of Social Housing              19
                                                                  19
8. Choice Based Letting (CBL)                                      19

9. Priorities for Transfers for Local Authority and
          Approved Housing Body Tenants

10. Succession to Tenancies

11. Succession in Other Circumstances

12. Permission to reside as an occupant in Council dwellings

13. Elderly Property Owners / Vacant Homes

14. Estate Management and Pre-Tenancy Training

15. Interpretation
                                            2
                     COMHAIRLE CATHRACH NA GAILLIMHE
                                 GALWAY CITY COUNCIL

                                   ALLOCATION SCHEME

   In accordance with Section 22 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
          2009 and the Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011 (S.I. No. 198 of
                                                     2011)

                                 Effective from 10th July 2017

1. Introduction

1.1 Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 as amended by the
         Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014 sets out the functions of
         housing authorities. Chapter 3 of Part 2 of that Act and the Housing Allocation
         Regulations 2011 sets out the legal framework for the allocation of dwellings
         by housing authorities.

1.2 This Allocation Scheme sets out the priorities and procedures for allocating
         dwellings to which section 22 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
         2009 applies as agreed by the Elected Members of Galway City Council. The
         Scheme recognises the need to achieve a balance in allocating dwellings
         between the needs and preferences of applicants, the wellbeing of existing
         tenants and the community as a whole, and the need to make the best use of
         publicly funded resources.

1.3 In performing its housing functions, Galway City Council (hereinafter `the
        Council') is obliged to have regard to the need to
               (a) counteract undue segregation in housing between persons of
                   different social backgrounds, and
               (b) ensure that a mixture of dwelling types and sizes and of classes of
                   tenure is provided to reasonably match the requirements of
                   households.

1.4 This Scheme is also aligned to other housing services plans and strategies. For
         example, the Scheme aims to promote the objectives contained in Galway City
         Council's Housing Services Plan and Homeless Action Plan as well as its
         Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy and Disability Strategy.

1.5 Galway City Council will also comply with any general policy directions and
         have regard to any guidelines issued by the Minister for Housing, Planning
         and Local Government to housing authorities in relation to the performance of
         their functions under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014.

1.6 Galway City Council may from time to time review this Scheme and, as it
         considers necessary and appropriate, amend the Scheme or make a new
         allocation scheme.

                                           3
2. Scope

2.1 This Scheme applies to the allocation of the following dwellings:

         (a) dwellings provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or Part V of the
              Planning and Development Act 2000 that are owned by the Council;

         (b) dwellings that are not owned by Galway City Council but which are held
              by Galway City Council under a contract or lease between Galway City
              Council and the owner concerned, including rental accommodation
              availability agreements, and

         (c) dwellings owned and provided by Approved Housing Bodies to whom
              assistance is given under section 6 of the Act of 1992 for the purposes of
              such provision.

2.2 The purpose of this Scheme is to determine the order of priority to be accorded
         in the allocation of dwellings to

         (a) households or particular classes of households who have been assessed
              under section 20 of the 2009 Act as being qualified for social housing
              support, and

         (b) households in receipt of social housing support that have applied to
              Galway City Council, to transfer to another dwelling or to purchase a
              dwelling under Part 3 of the 2009 Act (Incremental Purchase Scheme) and
              Galway City Council consents to such transfer or purchase as the case
              may be.

2.3 The Scheme makes provision for a proportion of dwellings in any part or parts
         of Galway City Council's functional area to be reserved for all or any of the
         following purposes:

              allocation to particular classes of household;
              particular forms of tenure;
              allocation to households transferring from other forms of social

                  housing support.

2.4 The Scheme also sets out the requirements for transfers by tenants and
         succession to tenancies.

3. General

3.1 Age: An applicant applying for the allocation of a dwelling under this Scheme
         must have reached the age of 18 years on or before the date of any allocation
         and must have a legal right to reside in the State.

3.2 Eligibility: Households must also comply with the eligibility criteria as set out
         in the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014, the Social Housing Assessment
         Regulations 2011 and the Social Housing Assessment (Amendment)
         Regulations 2011.

                                           4
3.3 Application and Additional Information: Applicant households must
         complete in full the prescribed application form provided by Galway City
         Council and must, within 4 weeks of being requested to do so by Galway City
         Council, submit any additional information including documents and other
         particulars that Galway City Council may reasonably request for the purposes
         of verifying information relating to their applications. Upon request for stated
         reasons Galway City Council may agree to an extension of this 4 week period.

3.4 Change in circumstances: Where after the making of an application, the
         circumstances of the applicant change (e.g. change of address, birth of a child,
         change in medical circumstances, changes in the number of persons residing
         or to reside with the applicant, etc.), it is the household's responsibility to
         inform Galway City Council of any such change. Galway City Council will
         review the household's application following any such notification and receipt
         of documentation.

3.5. Personal Data: All Application Forms (including transfer applications and
         succession application and for permission to reside) require applicants to
         furnish written authority to enable Galway City Council to access or obtain
         information held by other housing authorities, approved housing bodies, the
         Health Service Executive and An Garda Síochána which in Galway City
         Council's opinion is relevant to the applicant's application. Galway City
         Council processes personal information received in line with data protection
         legal requirements.

3.5 (a) Personal data of applicants will be shared between Galway City Council and
         Galway County Council where an applicant states an area of choice in Galway
         County Council's functional area and where an applicant states an area of
         choice in Galway City Council's functional area. Personal information will
         only be accessed in connection with the purposes for which it has been
         provided for i.e. it will only be used for official purposes.

3.6 Areas of Choice: Households applying in the first instance for allocation of a
         dwelling or applying to transfer from other forms of social housing support
         may specify areas of choice in the functional area of Galway City Council.
         The total number of areas of choice specified on the application form shall not
         exceed 3. A qualified household may notify Galway City Council that it
         wishes to change one or more than one area of choice in the application
         subject to compliance with the following conditions:

         (a) the household may not change an area of choice within the period of 12
             months following notification of that area of choice to Galway City
             Council,

         (b) where a household notifies Galway City Council that it no longer wishes to
             reside in an area of choice that it previously specified, the household may
             not, within the period of 12 months following such notification, change its
             preferences so as to specify that area of choice again, and

         (c) the total number of areas of choice specified by the household at any time
             shall not exceed 3. The areas of choice for Galway City Council are
             Galway City East, Galway City West and one area in Galway County.

                                           5
3.7 Housing Need: Housing need refers to standards that Galway City Council
         uses to assess a household's housing circumstances. In determining housing
         need, Galway City Council will have regard to the following matters relating
         to the household's current accommodation--
              whether it is an institution, emergency or emergency transitional
                  accommodation or a hostel
              whether it is overcrowded within the meaning of section 63 of the Act
                  of 1966,
              its fitness for human habitation, having regard to the matters set out in
                  the Second Schedule to the Act of 1966
              the extent to which it meets any accommodation requirement arising
                  from the enduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual
                  impairment of a household member
              where it is shared with another household, whether the household that
                  has applied for social housing support has a reasonable requirement for
                  separate accommodation, and
              whether it is unsuitable for the household's adequate housing--
                  (i) in any other material respect, having regard to particular
                     household circumstances, or
                  (ii) on exceptional medical or compassionate grounds.

         Households must notify Galway City Council of any change in circumstances
         that might affect their eligibility for a dwelling as soon as may be, but not later
         than 2 weeks immediately following any such change in circumstances. If a
         household fails to notify Galway City Council of such change in
         circumstances any offer of accommodation made by Galway City Council will
         be invalid and the offer withdrawn.

3.8 Type of dwelling: Households may indicate the type of dwelling property
         required. However, it should be noted that dwellings are allocated to match
         household size. Galway City Council will determine the family composition
         for a vacant dwelling as part of the allocation process to ensure the best use is
         made of the dwelling in terms of the size of the dwelling and the size of the
         prospective household so as to ensure that a dwelling is not under occupied or
         overcrowded. Galway City Council typically allows bedrooms for persons
         named on the household application. However, 2 bedroom units maybe
         allocated to singles due to personal circumstances.

3.9 Order of priority for dwelling allocations: Galway City Council will give
         reasonable preference to certain household groups when allocating dwellings.
         The household groups and the order of priority that will be given to the
         household groups are as follows:

            (a) homeless persons as defined by section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988
            (b) persons living in accommodation that is unfit for human habitation as

                 defined in Section 66(2) of the Housing Act, 1966, and the second
                 schedule of that Act, or, is materially unsuitable for their adequate
                 housing.
            (c) persons living in overcrowded accommodation within the meaning of
              section 63 of the Housing Act, 1966.

                                           6
         (d) persons in accommodation, the extent to which it does not meet their
             requirements, arising from the enduring physical, sensory, mental
             health or intellectual impairment of a household member;

         (e) persons who require accommodation on medical or compassionate grounds
         (f) persons who are not, in the opinion of Galway City Council, reasonably
         able to meet the cost of the accommodation which they are occupying or to
         obtain suitable alternative accommodation.
        (g) persons not included in any other specific category above, who have

             been assessed and approved for social housing supports.

         The priority that an application will receive will depend mainly on the priority
         afforded to each household group. Households are placed in one group
         only. As a general rule, priority as between households within the same group
         will be determined by reference to the date of entry of the household on
         Galway City Council's record of qualified households. In the allocation of
         dwellings where priority is claimed on grounds consisting of, or including,
         medical grounds, Galway City Council will require a report from a medical
         practitioner accredited by the Health Service Executive. Accordingly;

              Where priority is claimed on disability grounds the applicant shall
                  submit a report from an Occupational Therapist on their disability
                  condition and how this impacts on their housing requirements.

              Where priority is claimed on Medical Grounds, the applicant shall
                  submit a report from a Consultant on their medical condition and how
                  this impacts on their housing requirements.

3.10 RAS tenants: Qualified households who availed of the Rental
         Accommodation Scheme (RAS) prior to the 1st April, 2011 will remain on
         Galway City Council's record of qualified households pending the allocation
         of a dwelling to which section 22 of the Act of 2009 applies in accordance
         with this Scheme.

3.11 Housing Assistance Payment Scheme (HAP): In accordance with the
         Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014, housing assistance (HAP) is
         considered a form of social support and consequently households are not
         eligible to remain on the main housing waiting list once housed under HAP.
         However, acknowledging that households on the waiting list who avail of
         HAP might have expectations that they would receive a more permanent form
         of social housing support, HAP recipients can avail of a move to other forms
         of social housing support through a transfer list. All HAP recipients who
         choose to do so may apply to be placed on this transfer list. In applying to be
         placed on the transfer list, Galway City Council shall not impose a minimum
         time in HAP accommodation as a criterion for access to the transfer list. For
         those HAP recipients who come directly off the waiting list into HAP, and
         who subsequently apply to transfer to other forms of social housing support,
         the transfer list should reflect the specific priority that the household had on
         the main housing waiting list within the local authority area in which they are
         resident. That is, they should retain the time they spent on the waiting list,
         once on the transfer list, and therefore be placed on the transfer list with no
         less favourable terms than if they had remained on the main waiting list.

                                           7
4. Reservation of Dwellings

4.1 Galway City Council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
         designate a particular number or proportion of dwellings becoming available
         for allocation for the accommodation of
          Persons aged 60 years and over
          persons with a physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual impairment
          young persons leaving institutional care
          persons who are homeless
          persons in need of accommodation for medical or compassionate reasons
             or
          any other class or classes of persons for whom Galway City Council in its
             discretion considers it prudent to provide accommodation.

         Where a particular number or proportion of dwellings is set aside or
         designated for a particular category or categories of household, priority shall
         be accorded to households of that particular category in the allocation of those
         dwellings. The designation of dwellings for this purpose shall be by way of
         Chief Executive's Order. Priority will be determined to households in this
         category by the length of time that the household has been entered on Galway
         City Council's housing waiting list.

4.2 Galway City Council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
         designate a particular number or proportion of dwellings for allocation to
         households transferring from other forms of social housing support. Where a
         particular number or proportion of dwellings is set aside or designated for this
         particular category of households, priority shall be accorded to this particular
         category in the allocation of those dwellings. The order of priority will be
         determined in accordance with paragraph 9 below. The designation of
         dwellings for this purpose shall be by way of Chief Executive's Order.

4.3 Galway City Council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
         designate a particular number or proportion of dwellings for particular forms
         of tenure including but not limited to Incremental Purchase Schemes. The
         designation of dwellings for this purpose shall be by way of Chief Executive's
         Order. Priority will be determined to households in this category by the length
         of time that the household has been entered on Galway City Council's record
         of households that have applied to purchase a dwelling under Part 3 of the
         2009 Act and obtained Galway City Council's consent to such purchase.

5. Matters Disregarded

5.1 Galway City Council in applying the terms of this Scheme may disregard the
         accommodation that an applicant is occupying where there is reason to believe
         that the applicant has deliberately, or without good and sufficient reason, done
         or failed to do anything (other than an action or omission in good faith) in
         consequence of which the accommodation they are so occupying is less
         suitable for their adequate housing than other accommodation which it would
         have been, or would be, reasonable for them to occupy.

                                           8
5.2 Where a household specifies an area of choice in the functional area of a
         housing authority from which the household does not qualify for social
         housing support, Galway City Council will disregard that area of choice and
         the 12-month period in paragraph 3.6 (a) above shall not apply to the
         specification by the household of another area of choice in its stead.

5.3 Galway City Council will disregard the order of priority given to a household
         under this Scheme where

              the household is being provided with social housing support in a
                  dwelling let under a rental accommodation availability agreement,

              arising from specified exceptional circumstances, including
                  displacement due to fire, flood or any other emergency, development,
                  redevelopment or regeneration of an area by Galway City Council

              on exceptional medical or compassionate grounds
              to counteract social segregation
              where Galway City Council has assessed that a person's

                  accommodation needs cannot appropriately be met at that point in time
                  through independent living
              former tenants who breached the terms of a previous tenancy with
                  Galway City Council or any other housing authority or any approved
                  housing body or a tenancy made pursuant to the rental accommodation
                  scheme
              in emergency situations.

6. Deferral or Refusal of Applications

6.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or in
         this Scheme, Galway City Council may in accordance with the provisions of
         Section 14 (1) (b) of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997 (as
         amended), refuse to allocate or defer the allocation of a dwelling, to a housing
         applicant where:

            (a) Galway City Council considers that the applicant is or has been engaged
                in anti-social behaviour within the meaning of section 1(1) of the
                Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended) or that a
                letting to that applicant would not be in the interest of good estate
                management, or

            (b) the applicant fails to provide information, including information
                relating to persons residing or to reside with the applicant, requested by
                Galway City Council and which Galway City Council considers relevant
                in connection with an allocation.

            (c)The applicant causes or attempts to cause any threat, intimidation or
                harassment, coerces, obstructs, impedes, or interferes with, an officer of
                Galway City Council or a member of the family of such officer or
                employee or any person who provides or is to provide evidence in any
                proceedings under the Housing Acts.

                                           9
6.2 Notwithstanding anything contained in Part 3 of the 2009 Act, Galway City
         Council may refuse to sell a dwelling to an eligible household (under Part 3 of
         the 2009 Act) where Galway City Council considers that the eligible
         household or any member of the eligible household, as the case may be, is or
         has been engaged in anti-social behaviour within the meaning of section 1(1)
         of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended) or that a
         sale to that eligible household would not be in the interest of good estate
         management.

6.3 Galway City Council will not allocate a dwelling to a qualified household
         where a household member;

(a) damaged a dwelling previously provided by any housing authority or approved
         housing body and neither repaired the dwelling nor paid for the cost of
         repairing the dwelling unless and until the cost of repairing the dwelling has
         been paid to the housing authority or approved housing body concerned or the
         household member has entered into an arrangement with the housing authority
         or approved housing body concerned for the payment of such moneys, as the
         case may be;

(b) was previously a tenant of a dwelling provided by a housing authority or
         approved housing body and incurred arrears of rent for an accumulated period
         of 12 weeks or more in any period of 3 years as such tenant, which arrears
         have not been paid and the household member concerned has not entered into
         an arrangement with the housing authority or approved housing body for the
         payment of such moneys;

(c) voluntarily surrendered, within the previous two years, a local authority,
         approved housing body or Rental Accommodation Scheme tenancy, for a
         minimum period of two years.

6.4 Galway City Council will not allocate a dwelling to a household where a
         household member has breached the terms of the tenancy agreement in
         consequence of which a housing authority or an Approved Housing Body has
         obtained an order for possession of the dwelling.

6.5 Galway City Council will not allocate a dwelling to a household that:

              refuses to furnish any information requested by Galway City Council
                  which is reasonably required either for the purpose of assessing the
                  housing application or for estate management purposes.

              refuses to authorise the furnishing of personal data or information
                  pertaining to the household by other agencies where such data or
                  information is reasonably required by Galway City Council for estate
                  management purposes

              provides false or misleading information either on the application form
                  or at subsequent interviews.

                                           10
6.6 Galway City Council will take appropriate steps in accordance with law to
         prevent the illegal occupation of Council dwellings. In the event of illegal
         occupation, Galway City Council will take all necessary measures to recover
         possession of the dwelling. Galway City Council will not allocate a dwelling
         to a household that is illegally occupying a dwelling provided by Galway City
         Council or any part thereof whether continuously or otherwise.

6.7 Where Galway City Council receives an application for the allocation of a
         dwelling from a household that is illegally occupying a Council dwelling, the
         date of that application will be adjusted by the period of illegal occupation and
         the application will not be considered until the illegal occupation has ceased.

6.8 The allocation of accommodation to a household who illegally occupied a
         Council dwelling will be deferred until such time as that household delivers up
         vacant possession of the dwelling to Galway City Council in the same
         condition as prior to the commencement of the illegal occupation or has paid
         to Galway City Council any damage caused to the dwelling during the period
         of their illegal occupation.

6.9 All deferred applications will be reviewed by Galway City Council when a
         relevant change in circumstances is notified by the household applicant to
         Galway City Council and in any event no later than 12 months after the
         decision to defer has been made.

7. Refusal by Applicants of Offers of Social Housing

7.1 Where a qualified household refuses 2 reasonable offers of the allocation of
         different dwellings in any continuous period of one year commencing on the
         date of the first refusal, that household shall not, for the period of one year
         commencing on the date of the second refusal, be considered by Galway City
         Council for the allocation of a dwelling to which section 22 of the Act of 2009
         applies and the latter period shall not subsequently be reckonable in any way
         for the purposes of determining the relative priority of that household for a
         dwelling allocation.

7.2 An offer of a dwelling allocation by Galway City Council will be deemed
         reasonable where, in the opinion of Galway City Council, the dwelling offered
         meets the accommodation needs and requirements of the household and the
         dwelling is situate in an area of choice specified by the household.

         The only exception to this is where Galway City Council offers to allocate a
         dwelling to a household which has been housed in emergency homeless
         accommodation, displaced due to fire, flood or other emergency, development,
         redevelopment or regeneration of a housing area or on exceptional medical or
         compassionate grounds. In such circumstances, Galway City Council does not
         have to offer the household accommodation in any of their areas of choice for
         it to be considered a reasonable offer.

                                           11
7.3 Refusal of offers of accommodation under RAS and or Long Term Leasing
         and with Approved Housing Bodies will be treated by Galway City Council as
         a refusal of accommodation.

7.4 Refusal of offers of accommodation from those temporarily housed in
         emergency homeless accommodation will be treated by Galway City Council
         as a refusal of accommodation regardless of area of choice.

7.5 The final decision in relation to any allocation of a dwelling will be made by
         the Director of Service, Housing & Social Inclusion in pursuance of the
         authority delegated by Order of the Chief Executive or by any other person so
         delegated.

         In making this decision, the Director of Services, Housing & Social Inclusion
         or any other person so delegated shall have regard to all information furnished
         by the household in support of his application together with all other
         information relevant thereto known to the Director of Services, Housing &
         Social Inclusion or any other person so delegated including the household's
         waiting time on Galway City Council's social housing support waiting list or
         transfer waiting list, stated preference area(s), family size and type of dwelling
         required and available for allocation.

8. Choice Based Letting (CBL)

8.1 Choice Based Letting (CBL) is provided for under Regulations 6 ­ 11 of the
         Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011. Galway City Council will
         operate a Choice Based Letting scheme (CBL) to enable households qualified
         for the full range of Social Housing Supports on Galway City Council's
         housing waiting list, to exercise greater choice and involvement in selecting a
         new home. Dwellings owned by Galway City Council and provided for under
         the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or Part V of the Planning & Development Act
         2000, and Approved Housing Body Stock for which Galway City has
         nomination rights may be allocated through Choice Based Letting. However,
         not all such dwellings becoming available for letting will be offered through
         CBL. In particular, sheltered housing units, elderly person dwellings and
         specially adapted wheelchair accessible dwellings will not be allocated
         through CBL. Dwellings which are expected to be allocated within six months
         and which are to be allocated under CBL will be designated from time to time
         by Chief Executive Order. Subject to the making of a fresh determination of
         the household's qualification for social housing support and to good estate
         management, the allocation of a CBL will be made to the applicant household
         whose position is highest in accordance with this Allocation Scheme of those
         expressing an interest in the CBL dwelling.

8.2 Refusal of a CBL: Where a household refuses a reasonable offer of the
         allocation of a bid dwelling or is deemed to have refused such offer, that
         household shall not, for the period of one year commencing on the date of
         such refusal, be entitled to make a further application under CBL to the
         Council for the allocation of a bid dwelling. A refusal by a qualified household
         of an offer of the allocation of a bid dwelling made under a CBL scheme shall
         not constitute a refusal under paragraph 7.1 above. However, the applicant

                                           12
         household cannot bid for another CBL dwelling for 1 year in accordance with
         regulation 10(1).

8.3 The Council may, at its discretion, and at any stage prior to allocating a bid
         dwelling, decide to terminate the designation of that dwelling as a bid
         dwelling and not to proceed, or not to continue, with choice-based letting in
         respect of that dwelling.

9. Priorities for Transfers for Local Authority and AHB Tenants

9.1 Galway City Council has a transfer list that consists of existing tenants,
         including tenants of dwellings provided under the Rental Accommodation
         Scheme (RAS) and tenants of Approved Housing Bodies wishing to move to
         another dwelling.

9.2 Galway City Council will consider applications from all such tenants,
        including tenants of dwellings that may be provided under rental
        accommodation availability agreements. Galway City Council will give
        reasonable preference to certain groups of transfer applicants and the order of
        priority to be given to these groups are as follows:
         (i) households whose current accommodation is unfit or for human
                  habitation as defined in Section 66(2) of the Housing Act, 1966, and
                  the second schedule of that Act, or, is materially unsuitable for their
                  adequate housing;
         (ii) households whose current accommodation is overcrowded within the
                  meaning of section 63 of the Act of 1966
         (iii) households who are under utilising current accommodation
         (iv) households who need to move because their current accommodation
                  does not meet accommodation requirements arising from the enduring
                  physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual impairment of a
                  household member
         (v) households who need to move for exceptional medical or
                  compassionate reasons
         (vi) households whose current accommodation is unsuitable for the
                  household's adequate housing needs in any other material respect
         (vii) households who need to move to another locality where failure to meet
                  that need would give rise to hardship to the household or to others
         (viii) households seeking to enter into an incremental purchase arrangement
                  with the consent of Galway City Council

9.3 Allocations to households on the transfer list will be made taking into account
         all relevant information furnished by the household in support of its transfer
         application together with all other relevant information known to the Director
         of Services, Housing & Social Inclusion or the duly delegated housing officer,
         the date of entry of the household onto the transfer list and the household's
         stated preference area(s), family size and type of dwelling required.

9.4 Priority will be determined to households in this category by the length of time
         that the household has been entered on Galway City Council's record of
         households that have applied to transfer to another dwelling to which section

                                           13
         22 of the Act of 2009 applies and have obtained Galway City Council's
         consent to such transfer and the availability of suitable units.

9.5 Prior to the allocation of a dwelling on foot of a request for a transfer, Galway
         City Council reserves the right to have the following requirements met by the
         household in respect of their existing tenancy:

         (a) The household must have resided in the dwelling the subject of its existing
             tenancy agreement for a minimum period of two years prior to the date of
             allocation.

         (b) The household must have a clear rent account for a period of six months
             prior to the date of allocation;

         (c) The household must have a clear refuse and service charge account (if any)
             on the date of allocation;

         (d) The household's existing dwelling must be maintained in a manner
             satisfactory to Galway City Council;

         (e) The household must be compliant with all the conditions of its existing
             tenancy agreement;

9.6 HAP (Housing Assistance Payment) recipients will be progressed to other
         forms of social housing support in accordance with their priority and time
         spent on the Local Authority's housing list and subject to application to
         transfer.

9.7 Refusal of offers of a transfer from social housing supports will be treated by
         Galway City Council as a refusal of accommodation.

         Where a qualified household refuses 2 reasonable offers of the allocation of
         different dwellings in any continuous period of one year commencing on the
         date of the first refusal, that household shall not, for the period of one year
         commencing on the date of the second refusal, be considered by Galway City
         Council for the allocation of a dwelling or may not be considered for any
         further transfer.

10. Succession to Tenancies

10.1 When a Council tenant who is a sole tenant passes away or is unable to remain
         in a dwelling for reasons beyond their control (for example, long term
         hospitalisation or imprisonment) it may be possible for a member of the
         tenant's household to succeed to the tenancy.

         A formal written succession application must be made to Galway City Council
         within [2] months of the death or departure of the tenant and be accompanied
         by supporting evidence and information to prove their entitlement to succeed
         together with a completed housing application to assess eligibility for social
         housing. Galway City Council may grant an extension of time in special
         circumstances.

                                           14
10.2 Applicants must furnish any additional information including documents and
         other particulars that Galway City Council may reasonably request for the
         purposes of verifying information relating to their application.

10.3 On receipt of a succession application, Galway City Council will assess the
         application to determine whether or not the applicant has a right to succeed to
         the tenancy and will be subject to Garda vetting.

10.4 In order to succeed to the tenancy of a deceased tenant, an applicant must be
         able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of Galway City Council:

        (a) that they have been resident in the dwelling for a continuous period of at
             least two years prior to the death or departure of the tenant or throughout
             the time of the tenancy if the tenancy has been in existence for less than
             two years.

        (b) that they meet the eligibility criteria to qualify for social housing support in
              accordance with Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
              Act, 2009 and the Social Housing Assessment Regulations

        (c) that they were an approved member of the tenant's household and included
              on the rent declaration form in respect of the dwelling for at least two
              years prior to the death or departure of the tenant

        (d) that they have not engaged in anti-social behaviour in accordance with the
              terms of Galway City Councils Anti- Social Behaviour Policy

        (e) that they have not caused any breaches to the tenancy agreement while
              residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of a warning letter to
              the tenant under sections 7, 8 or 9 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
              Provisions) Act 2014

10.5 Applications will not be accepted if a person applying for succession has been
         an unsatisfactory former tenant of a Local Authority or of an Approved
         Housing Body. An unsatisfactory former tenant includes one who has
         damaged a property, has rental and/or non-rent debt or whose tenancy was
         terminated due to a breach of the tenancy agreement or has been involved in
         illegal or anti social behaviour activities in any property provided by Galway
         City Council, or any Local Authority or an Approved Housing Body.

10.6 Where there is more than one member of a deceased tenant's household who
         meets the eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 10.4 above, a joint tenancy
         may be granted by Galway City Council based on all the circumstances of the
         household and the agreement of the qualifying members of the household to
         enter into a joint tenancy. If the qualifying members of the household cannot
         agree amongst themselves to a joint tenancy or who among them is to become
         the sole tenant, Galway City Council will grant the tenancy to the eldest
         qualifying member of the household.

10.7 Where a household member is eligible to succeed to a tenancy on the death of
         the previous tenant and the dwelling is in the opinion of Galway City Council
         larger than is reasonably required for his or her adequate accommodation
         needs or the dwelling has been designed and adapted for someone with a
         physical disability who no longer resides in the dwelling, Galway City Council

                                           15
         will not allocate that dwelling but will allocate an alternative dwelling
         suitable, subject to availability, for his or her adequate housing that is located
         as near as practicable to the dwelling or in the household member's area of
         choice. Despite the fact that the surviving family members may have lived in
         dwellings for many years, Galway City Council will seek to recover
         possession of under-occupied dwellings in order to ensure the best use of their
         housing stock. The household member will be given priority for an allocation
         of an appropriately sized dwelling and given reasonable time to move to the
         alternative dwelling.

10.8 It may be appropriate in exceptional circumstances to grant a new tenancy to a
         person who does not have a legal right to succeed following the death of a sole
         tenant. Where a sole tenant dies and another person (who does not meet the
         eligibility criteria to succeed to the tenancy has been living with the tenant for
         the year prior to the tenant's death for the purpose of providing care for the
         tenant or is the legal guardian or custodian of the deceased tenant's minor
         dependants and needs to live with them in order to fulfil that role Galway City
         Council may in its absolute discretion consider granting a tenancy to such
         person, either in the same dwelling or in suitable alternative dwelling provided
         the allocation has no adverse implications for the good use of the housing
         stock

10.9 Under some circumstances where succession is being considered by the City
         Council, as part of the succession application, the Council may require the
         applicant to move to another property if it considers the property too large or
         has been designed and adapted for someone with a physical disability who no
         longer resides in the property. This may apply despite the applicant possibly
         having lived in the property for many years. This is necessary to ensure the
         best use of housing stock and is particularly important in areas of high housing
         demand.

10.10 No succession to tenancy will be considered where the dwelling is designated
         as an Older Persons Dwelling (OPD) and where the person making the
         succession application is not themselves an elderly person. Galway City
         Council may in its absolute discretion consider granting a tenancy in suitable
         alternative dwelling provided the allocation has no adverse implications for
         the best use of the housing stock.

10.11 Each succession application will be examined on its own merits and
         applications will be considered where the above conditions have been
         complied with.

11. Succession in Other Circumstances

11.1 In cases where a joint tenant of a dwelling provided by Galway City Council
         vacates the dwelling and ceases to reside in the dwelling for a period of at
         least one year, the Director of Service, Housing & Social Inclusion after due
         consideration of all the known and relevant circumstances (including the non
         payment of rent by that joint tenant) will approve the allocation of the

                                           16
         dwelling to the remaining joint tenant as sole tenant provided the joint tenant
         who has remained residing in the dwelling serves on Galway City Council a
         notice to quit terminating the joint tenancy provided the dwelling is not under-
         occupied.

11.2 In cases where there is an existing tenancy of a dwelling provided by the City
         Council to tenants who are married but who have executed a deed of
         separation or obtained a decree of judicial separation, Galway City Council
         will have regard to the terms of such agreement or court order as the case may
         be in so far as it relates to the status of the tenancy. In cases where a property
         adjustment order has been made by court order, Galway City Council will give
         effect to any order transferring the tenancy to a sole tenant provided a certified
         true copy of the court order is produced.

11.3 In cases where the sole tenant vacates a dwelling provided by Galway City
         Council, leaving a spouse, co-habitant or civil partner in occupation of the
         dwelling, the Director of Services, Housing & Social Inclusion after due
         consideration of all the known and relevant circumstances will approve the
         allocation of the dwelling to the remaining spouse or co-habitant or civil
         partner (if any) of the vacating tenant provided:

         (a) A Form of Surrender in respect of the tenancy, witnessed by a
             practicing solicitor, is signed by the tenant and delivered to the
             Council.

         (b) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner has resided in the
             dwelling for a period of at least two years and has been assessed for rent
             purposes and is not the owner of any property or

         (c) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner who having left the
             dwelling for a period, has resided in the dwelling with the tenant with the
             permission of the City Council for a period of at least 2 years prior to the
             vacating of the dwelling by the tenant and is not the owner of any
             property, and

         (d) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner meets the eligibility
             criteria to qualify for social housing support in accordance with Section 20
             of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2009 and the Social
             Housing Assessment Regulations.

         (e) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner will be subject to Garda
             vetting.

12. Permission to reside as an occupant in Council dwellings

12.1 The prior written consent of Galway City Council is required where a tenant
         wishes to have a person reside with them. Applications by a tenant for such
         consent will be considered on their merits and will involve an assessment of
         the following:

         (a) The applicant's reasons for the application;

                                           17
         (b) The applicant's medical, welfare or compassionate needs;
         (c) The applicant's need for full time care;
         (d) The capacity of the dwelling to accommodate the proposed resident

                  having regard to the number of persons in occupation of the dwelling
                  with the tenant;
         (e) The proposed resident's ability to provide housing from his or her own
                  financial resources;
         (f) The proposed resident's previous record, if any, as a tenant or resident
                  of a housing authority or Approved Housing Body or as a RAS tenant.
         (g) The verification of the proposed residents suitability as an occupier.

         Where Galway City Council is satisfied that the application to reside is being
         made solely in an effort to enable the proposed resident to succeed to the
         tenancy, permission to reside will not be granted.

12.2 The granting of permission to a tenant to have the proposed resident reside
         with the tenant does not confer an automatic right on the proposed resident to
         succeed to the tenancy in the dwelling and confers no entitlement whatsoever
         on the proposed resident to any interest in the dwelling. Upon the tenant
         ceasing to hold the tenancy either through surrender, termination or otherwise,
         the approved resident may be required to vacate the dwelling.

12.3 The granting of permission to the tenant to have the proposed resident reside
         in the dwelling with the tenant for the purpose of caring for the tenant for the
         duration of an illness shall be subject to the tenant obtaining independent legal
         advice prior to the execution of either a Carer's Agreement or a Residency
         Agreement as the case may be and producing same to Galway City Council
         together with a certificate from the tenant's solicitor so confirming.

12.4 Galway City Council will consider Joint Tenancy requests from adult children
         residing with a parent for the purposes of the Tenant Incremental Purchase
         Scheme, under the following circumstances:
         (a) A formal written application for Joint Tenancy must be made to Galway
             City Council. The application must be made jointly by the Tenant and the
             proposed Tenant and must coincide with a Tenant Incremental Purchase
             Scheme application. Applications will not be considered where they are
             made in the absence of an application for Tenant Purchase.
         (b) The Joint Tenancy application will be processed alongside the Tenant
             Purchase application. If for some reason, the Tenant Purchase application
             does not proceed, Joint Tenancy will not be granted.
         (c) Applications will only be accepted for properties eligible for sale under
             the Tenant Purchase Scheme. The terms and conditions of the Tenant
             Purchase Scheme in place at the time of application are applicable.
         (d) The applicant must demonstrate that:
             (i) they have been resident in the dwelling for at least two years
             (ii) they are an approved member of the tenant's household and included
                  on the rent declaration form in respect of the dwelling for their period
                  of residence at the property.

                                           18
             (iii) they meet the eligibility criteria to qualify for social housing support
                  in accordance with Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
                  Provisions) Act, 2009 and the Social Housing Assessment Regulations

             (iv) they have not engaged in anti-social behaviour in accordance with the
                  terms of Galway City Councils Anti- Social Behaviour Policy

             (v) they have not caused any breaches to the Tenancy Agreement while
                  residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of a warning letter
                  to the Tenant under sections 7, 8 or 9 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
                  Provisions) Act 2014

         In these circumstances, Galway City Council may grant a Joint Tenancy to
         facilitate the purchase of a property under the Tenant Purchase Scheme.

13. Elderly Property Owners / Vacant Homes

         Housing applications and/or applications for permission to reside from elderly
         persons who are owners of sub-standard, unsuitable private dwellings and who
         are unable to improve their standard of accommodation from within their own
         resources, may be considered for tenure of a local authority or Approved
         Housing Body house subject to the following conditions:

    a) The Council is given the option to purchase their existing dwelling at a cost of
         50% of the market value.

    b) If the Council do not wish to acquire the dwelling, the dwelling will be sold on
         the open market by the applicant and 50% of the sale proceeds will be paid to
         the Council.

    Both parties will be required to obtain their own separate independent valuations
    in relation to option (a) above. The applicant will nominate a selling agent in
    relation to option (b). The applicant will also be required to obtain independent
    legal advice before entering into any such agreement with the Council.

14. Estate Management and Pre-Tenancy Training

         In the interests of good estate management, an applicant household who is
         being considered for an allocation of a dwelling provided by Galway City
         Council will be required as a pre-condition of the grant of the tenancy to
         attend and participate in a pre-tenancy course.

15. Interpretation

In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires:-

A reference to any enactment (whether specifically named or not) or to any section or
sub-section therein shall include any statutory modifications thereof whether by way
of amendment, addition, deletion or repeal and re-enactment with or without
amendment for the time being in force and all statutory instruments, orders, notices,
regulations and directions for the time being made, issued or given thereunder or
deriving validity therefrom.

                                           19
Any reference to a paragraph by number is a reference to that numbered paragraph as
it appears in this Scheme.

Where the context so admits or requires the masculine includes the feminine and
neuter genders and singular includes the plural.

The headings to the paragraphs of this Scheme are for ease of reference only and are
not to be used for purposes of construing this Scheme.

`anti-social behaviour' shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 1(1) of
the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended). It includes either or
both of the following, namely -

         (a) the manufacture, production, preparation, importation, exportation,
         sale, supply, possession for the purposes of sale or supply, or distribution of a
         controlled drug (within the meaning of the Misuse of Drugs Acts, 1977 to
         2007),

         (b) any behaviour which causes or is likely to cause any significant or
         persistent danger, injury, damage, alarm, loss or fear to any person living,
         working or otherwise lawfully in or in the vicinity of a house provided by a
         Housing Authority under the Housing Acts, 1966 to 2014 and part V of the
         Planning and Development Act 2000, or a housing estate in which the house is
         situate or a traveller halting site and, without prejudice to the foregoing,
         includes

         violence, threats, intimidation, coercion, harassment or serious obstruction of
         any person behaviour which causes any significant or persistent impairment
         of a person's use or enjoyment of his or her home, or
         damage to or defacement by writing or other marks of any property, including
         a person's home.

`bid dwelling' means a dwelling that has been designated for choice-based letting

`choice based letting' means the procedure set out in Regulations 6 to 11 of the
Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 for determining the individual
 households that will be considered for the allocation of a bid dwelling

`emergency' is an emergency decided as such by the Director of Service, Housing &
Social Inclusion or his nominated official whose decision in this regard shall be final

`overcrowding' is to be construed in accordance with Section 63 of the Housing Act,
1966 so that a dwelling shall be deemed to be overcrowded at any time when the
number of persons ordinarily sleeping in the dwelling and the number of rooms in the
dwelling either:-

         (a) are such that any two of those persons, being persons of ten years of
                  age or more of opposite sexes and not being persons living together as
                  husband and wife, must sleep in the same room, or

                                           20
         (b) are such that the free air space in any room used as a sleeping
                  apartment, for any person is less than four hundred cubic feet (the
                  height of the room, if it exceeds eight feet, being taken to be eight feet,
                  for the purposes of calculating free air space.

`RAS tenant' means the tenant of a dwelling which is the subject of a rental
         accommodation scheme

`Scheme' means this Allocation Scheme.
`the 2009 Act' means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 (No. 22 of

         2009)
`social housing support' has the meaning assigned to it by section 19 of the 2009 Act
`unfit' has the meaning assigned to it by section 66 of the Housing Act 1966
HAP (Housing Assistance Payment) has the meaning assigned to in the Housing Act

         2014

                                           21
