                                HOUSING ALLOCATION SCHEME

In accordance with Section 22 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009
and the Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011 (S.I. No. 198 of 2011) as amended.

                                Plenary Council Meeting May 2024

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 1 of 26                      Effective from 20/05/24
                                Effective from 20 May 2024

1  Introduction

1.1 Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 as amended by the Housing
         (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") sets out the
         functions of housing authorities. Chapter 3 of Part 2 of the Act and the Social Housing
         Allocation Regulations 2011 and the Social Housing Allocation (Amendment) Regulations
         2016 (hereinafter referred to as "the Regulations") set out the legal framework for the
         allocation of dwellings by housing authorities.

1.2 This Allocation Scheme (hereinafter referred to as "the Scheme") sets out the priorities
         and procedures for allocating dwellings to which section 22 of "the Act" applies, as
         agreed by the Elected Members of Galway County Council. The Scheme recognises
         the need to achieve a balance in allocating dwellings between the needs and
         preferences of applicants, the wellbeing of existing tenants and the community as a
         whole, and the need to make the best use of the council's housing stock and publicly
         funded resources.

1.3 In performing its housing functions, Galway County Council (hereinafter referred to as
         "the council") is obliged to have regard to the need to
         (a) counteract undue segregation in housing between persons of different social
                   backgrounds, and
         (b) ensure that a mixture of dwelling types and sizes and of classes of tenure
                   is provided to reasonably match the requirements of households.

1.4 This Scheme is also aligned to all relevant housing plans and strategies. The Scheme
         aims to promote the objectives contained in the Council's Housing Strategy and:-
         (a) Housing First,
         (b) Homelessness Action Plan,
         (c) Traveller Accommodation Programme,
         (d) Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities,
         (e) Sláintecare ­ My Home MHCIS (Mental Health, Community Integration & Support)
                   ­ Integrating Mental Health, Social Care & Housing in Local Community,
         (f) Tenancy Sustainment Strategy.
         (g) Estate Management Strategy.
         (h) Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy
         (i) Scéim Teanga Chomhairle Chontae na Gaillimhe.
         (j) Tenant in Situ (incorporating Transboundary) ­ applicants with valid notices of
                   termination (NTQ)
         (k) Any p ro je ct s o r in it ia ti ve s f o r w h o m t h e co u n c i l i n its discretion considers
                   it prudent to provide accommodation.

1.5 The Council will also comply with any general policy directions and have regard to
         any guidelines or directions issued to housing authorities by the Minister for Housing,
         Planning & Local Government in relation to the performance of their functions under the
         Housing Acts 1966 to 2014.

1.6 The Council may from time to time review this Scheme and, as it considers necessary
         and appropriate, amend the Scheme or make a new Allocation Scheme.

1.7 Allocation of dwellings in accordance with this housing allocation scheme shall be by way

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 2 of 26                Effective from 20/05/24
         of Chief Executive's Order

2. Scope

2.1 This Scheme applies to the allocation of the following dwellings only:

          (a) dwellings provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or Part V of the Planning
                   and Development Act 2000 that are owned by the council,

          (b) dwellings that are not owned by the council but which are held by the
                   council under a contract or lease between the council and the owner concerned,
                   in clu din g ren tal accommodation availability agreements, lease agreements
                   and

          (c) dwellings owned and provided by approved bodies to whom assistance is given
                   under section 6 of the Act of 1992 for the purposes of such provision.

          (d) Dwellings provided for under the RAS and MTR schemes
          (e) Dwellings under consideration for purchase under Tenant-in-Situ.

2.2 The purpose of this Scheme is to determine the order of priority to be accorded and
         implemented in the allocation of dwellings to:

(a) households or particular classes of households who have been assessed under
         section 20 of the Act as being qualified for social housing support, and

(b) households in receipt of social housing support that have applied to the council to
         transfer to another dwelling or to purchase a dwelling under Part 3 of the Act and
         the council consents to such transfer or purchase.

2.3 The Scheme makes provision for a proportion of dwellings in any part or parts of the
         council's functional area to be reserved for all or any of the following purposes:

(a) allocation to particular classes of household;
(b) allocation to particular forms of tenure;
(c) allocation to households transferring from other forms of social housing

         support.

2.4 The Scheme also sets out the requirements and procedures for transfers, including
          tenants of dwellings provided under the Social Housing Leasing initiatives, those
          accommodated under HAP, succession to tenancies and the downsizing scheme for
          the elderly who want to move from an under-occupied dwelling to other housing.

3. General

3.1 Age: An applicant applying for the allocation of a dwelling under this Scheme must have
         reached the age of 18 years on or before the date of any allocation and must have a
         legal right to reside in the State.

Eligibility: Households must also comply with the eligibility criteria as set out in the Housing Acts

1966 to 2014, the Regulations and the Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011, the

Social Housing Assessment (Amendment) Regulations 2011, the Social Housing Assessment

(Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2011 as amended by the Social Housing Assessment

(Amendment) Regulations 2016.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 3 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
3.2 Application and Additional Information: Applicant households must complete in full
         the prescribed Application Form provided by the council and must, within 4 weeks of
         being requested to do so by the council, submit any additional information, including
         documents and other particulars, that the council may reasonably request for the
         purposes of verifying information relating to their application. Upon request for stated
         reasons the council may agree to an extension of this 4-week period.

3.3 Change in circumstances: Where, after the making of an application, the
         circumstances of the applicant change (e.g. change of address, birth of a child, change
         in medical circumstances, changes in the number of persons residing or to reside with
         the applicant, etc.), it is the household's responsibility to inform the council of any
         such change. The council will review the household's application following any such
         notification.

3.5. Personal Data: All Application Forms (including transfer applications, succession
         applications and applications for permission to reside) require applicants to furnish written
         authority to enable the council to access or obtain information held by other housing
         authorities, approved housing bodies, the Health Service Executive and An Garda
         Síochána which in the council's opinion is relevant to the applicant's application. The
         council processes personal information received in line with data protection legal
         requirements.

3.6 Areas of Choice: Households applying in the first instance for allocation of a dwelling or
         applying to transfer from other forms of social housing support may specify areas of
         choice in the application area of the council. The total number of areas of choice
         specified on the Application Form shall not exceed three. A qualified household may
         notify the council that it wishes to change one or more than one area of choice in the
         application subject to compliance with the following conditions:

          (a) the household may not change an area of choice within the period of 12 months
                   following notification of that area of choice to the council,

          (b) where a household notifies the council that it no longer wishes to reside in
                   an area of choice that it previously specified, the household may not, within the
                   period of 12 months following such notification, change its preferences so as to
                   specify that area of choice again, and

          (c) the total number of areas of choice specified by the household at any time shall
                   not exceed three.

3.7 Housing Need: Housing need refers to standards that the council uses to assess a
         household's housing circumstances. In determining housing need, the council will have
         regard, among other things, to the following matters relating to the household's current
         accommodation.
            a. whether it is an institution, emergency accommodation or a hostel,
            b. whether the household is homeless with the meaning of section 2 of the Housing
                 Act 1988
            c. whether it is overcrowded within the meaning of section 63 of the Act of 1966,
            d. its fitness for human habitation, having regard to the matters set out in the Second
                 Schedule to the Act of 1966,
            e. the extent to which it meets any accommodation requirement arising from the
                 enduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual impairment of a household

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 4 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
member

f. whether the accommodation is unsuitable for the household's adequate housing on

exceptional medical or compassionate grounds,

g. where it is shared with another household, whether the household that has applied

for social housing support has a reasonable requirement for separate

accommodation,

h. whether it has been concluded, under the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process set

out in the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 2013 issued under section 117 of

the Central Bank Act 1989 (No. 16 of 1989), that the mortgage on the

accommodation is unsustainable for the mortgagee, and

i. where the household, in the opinion of the housing authority, requires the payment

of a supplement under section 198(3) of the Act of 2005 towards the amount

payable by the household in respect of the household's current accommodation,

and

j. whether the accommodation is unsuitable for the household's adequate housing

in any other material respect, having regard to particular           household

circumstances.

k. To facilitate in accordance with Section 4 below

Households must notify the council of any change in circumstances that might affect their
eligibility for a dwelling as soon as may be, but not later than two weeks immediately
following any such change in circumstances. If a household fails to notify the council of
such change in circumstances any offer of accommodation made by the council will be
invalid and the offer withdrawn.

3.8 Type of dwelling: Households may indicate the type of dwelling property required
         (e.g. general needs, adapted or sheltered), the design of the dwelling (e.g. house,
         bungalow, apartment, halting bay, group housing) and the number of bedrooms they
         wish to be considered for. However, it should be noted that dwellings are allocated to
         match household size. The council will determine the family composition for a vacant
         dwelling as part of the allocation process to ensure the best use is made of the dwelling
         in terms of the size of the dwelling and the size of the prospective household so as to
         ensure that a dwelling is not under occupied or overcrowded. Accordingly,

· 1 or 2 bed dwellings are offered to an individual or to a couple,

· 2 bed dwellings are offered to an individual or a couple or lone parent or two adults

not living as a couple e.g. parent and adult child: or individual and carer,

· 3 bed dwellings are offered to a couple or lone parent with one, two, three, or four

children on the basis that children of the opposite sex and adults of the opposite

sex not living as a couple are not required to share a bedroom, or any three adults

where none are living as a couple,

· 4 bed dwellings are offered to households consisting of a couple or lone parent with

four, five or six children on the basis that children of the opposite sex and adults of

the opposite sex not living as a couple or any four adults where no two are living as

a couple,

· 5+ bed dwellings are offered to households consisting of a couple or lone parent

with six or more children.

· Separated families. In relation to separated families where one parent already

occupies a Local Authority dwelling, where 2nd parent has access to their

children, the 2nd parent qualifies for that family bed category less 1

bedroom. e.g. Parent with access to children who require a 3 bed unit. If they have

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 5 of 26                Effective from 20/05/24
       full access, they qualify for a 3 bed unit, If shared/weekend access, they qualify for
       a 2 bed unit.
· Sharing of bedrooms. Sharing of bedrooms between same sex adult children and
       their younger siblings should be avoided where possible. This is where there is a
       large age gap. e.g. under 10 & over 18.

3.9 Order of priority for dwelling allocations: The council will give reasonable preference
         to certain household groups when allocating dwellings. The household groups and the
         order of priority that will be given to the household groups are as follows:

          (a) homeless persons as defined by Section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988 and approved
                   households under Tenant-in-Situ.

          (b) persons living in accommodation that is unfit for human habitation as defined in
                   Section 66(2) of the Housing Act, 1966, and the Second Schedule of that Act,
                   or, is materially unsuitable for their adequate housing.

          (c) persons in accommodation, the extent to which it does not meet their
                   requirements, arising from the enduring physical, sensory, mental health or
                   intellectual impairment of a household member.

          (d) persons who require accommodation on exceptional medical or compassionate
                   grounds.

          (e) persons living in overcrowded accommodation within the meaning of Section
                   63 of the Housing Act, 1966.

          (f) involuntarily sharing accommodation with another person and having a reasonable
                   requirement for separate accommodation.

          (g) persons who are not, in the opinion of the council, reasonably able to meet the
                   cost of the accommodation which they are occupying or to obtain suitable
                   alternative accommodation.

          (h) persons not included in any other specific category above, who have been
                   assessed and approved for social housing supports.

The priority that an application will receive will depend mainly on the priority afforded to
each household group. Households a r e placed in o n e g r o u p only.

The council shall apply a Gaeltacht Residential Qualification in accordance with the
requirements of the Galway County Council Gaeltacht Local Area Plan, in order to
protect the linguistic and cultural heritage of the Gaeltacht, including the promotion of
Irish as a community language.

As a general rule, and in accordance with Regulation No. 4(2) of the Regulations,
priority as between households within the same group will be determined by reference
to the date of entry of the household on the council's record of qualified households.
In the allocation of dwellings where priority is claimed on grounds consisting of, or
including, exceptional medical grounds, the Council will require a report from a medical
practitioner employed by the Health Service Executive at the time of application.

3.10 RAS tenants: Tenants who transferred to RAS prior to the introduction of the Regulations
         on the 1st April 2011, will be given credit for their time on the record of qualified
         households from the date of their approved housing application, where they apply to

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 6 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
         transfer to another form of social housing support, and were on the record of qualified
         households since they commenced their RAS tenancy. Allocations shall be made to
         such tenants in accordance with the Order of Priorities as per paragraph 9 below.

4. Dwellings to be reserved in certain circumstances

4.1 Specific Categories. The council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
          designate a particular number or proportion of dwellings becoming available for allocation
          for the accommodation of:

(i) Homelessness Action Plan & Homeless Initiatives such as;
         a. Housing First
         b. Youth Homelessness Projects (properties leased on a licence to an AHB, the
              occupants will be their licencees)
         c. Community Based Housing projects (properties leased on licence to an AHB, the
              occupants will be their licensees)
         d. Medium Term Supported Housing
         e. Cold Weather Response
         f. Applicants under the Tenant-in-Situ.

(ii) Traveller Accommodation Programme,

(iii) Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities,

(iv) Sláintecare ­ My Home MHCIS (Mental Health, Community Integration & Support) ­
    Integrating Mental Health, Social Care & Housing in Local Community,

(v) Young People Leaving Care (Aftercare/Tusla) and Child care cases deemed a priority
    by Galway County Council in conjunctions with Tusla Child Protection and Welfare services

(vi) Domestic Abuse

(vii) Older Persons and Safeguarding

(viii)  Households/Applicants identified by Social Work who have a requirement

for accommodation for `exceptional reasons' outside of the categories included in

standardised allocation's procedures and outlined above, for e.g. cases of a very sensitive

and vulnerable nature.

(ix) Refugee Resettlement Programme

(x) SORAM and Prison discharge

(xi) Tenant in Situ a n d incorporating Transboundary Clients ­applicants with valid Notices
    of Termination (NTQ)

(xii) Any projects or initiatives for whom the Council in its discretion considers it prudent to
    provide accommodation.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024        Page 7 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 8 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
Where a particular number or proportion of dwellings is set aside or designated to
facilitate implementation of projects or initiatives, priority shall be accorded to
households eligible and prioritised for such projects in the allocation of those dwellings.

 4.2 Transfers. The council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
           designate a particular number or proportion of dwellings for allocation to
           households transferring from other forms of social housing support. Where a
           particular number or proportion of dwellings is set aside or designated for this
           particular category of households, priority shall be accorded to this particular
           category in the allocation of those dwellings. The order of priority will be
           determined in accordance with Condition 9 below.

4.3 Incremental Purchase Schemes etc. The council will from time to time,
         as it considers appropriate, designate a particular number or proportion of
         dwellings for particular forms of tenure, including, but not limited to
         Incremental Purchase Schemes. The order of priority will be determined for
         households in these categories by the length of time that the household
         has been entered on the council's record of households that have applied
         to purchase a dwelling under Part 3 of the 2009 Act and obtained the
         council's consent to such purchase.

4.4 Tenant in Situ. The council will from time to time, as it considers appropriate,
         consider the purchase and allocation of a dwelling under Tenant-in-Situ. This
         applies where the landlord is selling the dwelling and the tenant has qualified
         for social housing support and aims to prevent the tenant from becoming
         homeless. It also applies to transboundary clients of other local authorities
         who are currently renting in the County of Galway. The procedure by which a
         property will be allocated under Tenant in Situ subject is as follows:
         (a) The dwelling matches the housing needs of the household.
         (b) The dwelling is considered to be structurally sound and compliant with
                   planning.
         (c) The dwelling is acquired in accordance with the Department of
                   Housing, Local Government and Heritage Social Housing Investment
                   Programme ­ Acquisition Cost Guidelines for Social Housing.
         (d) The dwelling can be acquired for an amount in accordance with an
                   independent valuation
         (e) The dwelling does not require major repairs.
         (f) The household can remain in the property while any necessary minor
                   works are undertaken.

       Subject to compliance with the procedure detailed above the household will be
       allocated the tenancy of the dwelling subject to a signed tenancy agreement.

5. Matters Disregarded

5.1 The council will disregard the accommodation that a household is occupying
         where the council has reason to believe that the household has deliberately,
         or without good and sufficient reason, done or failed to do anything (other
         than an action or omission in good faith) in consequence of
         which the accommodation the household is occupying is less suitable for
         the household's adequate housing than other accommodation which it
         would have been, or would be, reasonable for the household to occupy.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 9 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
5.2 Where a household specifies an area of choice in the application area of
         a housing authority for which the household does not qualify for social housing
         support, the council will disregard that area of choice and the 12-month period
         in paragraph 3.6 (a) above shall not apply to the specification by the household
         of an alternative area of choice in its stead.

5.3 The council will disregard the order of priority given to a household under
         this Scheme

(a)  where the household is being provided with social housing

     support in a dwelling let under a rental accommodation availability

     agreement.

(b)  arising from specified exceptional circumstances, including

     displacement due to fire, flood or any other emergency,

     development, redevelopment or regeneration of an area by the

     council.

(c)  on exceptional medical or compassionate grounds.

(d)  to counteract social segregation.

(e)  where the council has assessed that a person's accommodation

     needs cannot appropriately be met at that point in time

     through independent living.

(f)  for former tenants who breached the terms of a previous tenancy

     with the council or any other housing authority or any approved

     housing body or a tenancy made pursuant to the rental

     accommodation scheme or the housing assistance payment

     scheme.

(g)  in emergency situations.

6. Deferral or Refusal of Applications

6.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or in
          this Scheme, the council may in accordance with the provisions of Section 14
          (1) (b) of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997 (as amended),
          refuse to allocate or defer the allocation of a dwelling, to a housing applicant
          where:

(a) the council considers that the applicant is or has been engaged in
         anti- social behaviour within the mean in g of se ction 1 (1) of the
         Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended) or that a
         letting to that applicant would not be in the interest of good estate
         management, or

(b) the applicant fails to provide information requested by the council,
         including information relating to persons residing or to reside with
         the applicant and which the council considers relevant in connection
         with an allocation.

6.2 Notwithstanding anything contained in Part 3 of the 2009 Act, the council
         may refuse to sell a dwelling to an eligible household (under Part 3 of the
         2009 Act) where the Council considers that the eligible household or any
         member of the eligible household, as the case may be, is or has been engaged
         in anti-social behaviour within the meaning of section 1(1) of the Housing

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 10 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended) or that a sale to that
eligible household would not be in the interest of good estate management.

The Council will refuse to accept an application for social housing support
from persons who voluntarily surrendered, within the previous two years, a
Local Authority, Approved Housing Body or Rental Accommodation Scheme
tenancy in accordance with Section 20 (8) of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provision) Act, 2009.

6.3 The council will not allocate a dwelling to a qualified household where a
          household member

         (a) damaged a dwelling previously provided by any housing authority or
              approved housing body and neither repaired the dwelling nor paid for the
              cost of repairing the dwelling,

         (b) was previously a tenant of a dwelling provided by a housing authority,
              approved housing body or a dwelling provided under RAS, HAP or Local
              Authority Leasing schemes and incurred arrears of rent for an accumulated
              period of 12 weeks or more in any period of 3 years as such tenant, which
              arrears have not been paid and the household member concerned has not
              entered into an arrangement with the housing authority for the payment of
              such moneys

          unless and until the cost of repairing the dwelling has been paid to the housing
          authority concerned or the household member has entered into an
          arrangement with the housing authority concerned for the payment of such
          moneys, as the case may be.

6.4 The council will not allocate a dwelling to a household where a household
          member has breached the terms of the tenancy agreement in consequence
          of which a housing authority or an approved body has obtained an order
          for possession of the dwelling.

6.5 The council will not allocate a dwelling to a household that:

          · refuses to furnish any information requested by the council which is
                   reasonably required either for the purpose of assessing the housing
                   application or for estate management purposes.

            · refuses to authorise the furnishing of personal data or information
                   pertaining to the household by other agencies where such data or
                   information is reasonably required by the council for estate
                   management purposes.

            · provides false or misleading information either on the application form
                   or at subsequent interviews.

6.6 The council will take appropriate steps in accordance with law to prevent the
          illegal occupation of council dwellings. In the event of illegal occupation, the
          council will take all necessary measures to recover possession of the
          dwelling. The council will not allocate a dwelling to a household that is
          illegally occupying a dwelling provided by the council or any part thereof,
          whether continuously or otherwise

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 11 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
6.7 Where the council receives an application for the allocation of a dwelling from
         a household that is illegally occupying a council dwelling, the date of that
         application will be adjusted by the period of illegal occupation and the
         application will not be considered until the illegal occupation has ceased.

6.8 The allocation of accommodation to a household who illegally occupied a
         council dwelling will be deferred until such time as that household delivers up
         vacant possession of the dwelling to the council in the same condition as prior
         to the commencement of the illegal occupation or has paid to the council any
         damage caused to the dwelling during the period of their illegal occupation.

6.9 All deferred applications will be reviewed by the council when a relevant
          change in circumstances is notified by the household applicant to the council
          and in any event no later than twelve months after the decision to defer has
          been made.

7. Refusal by Applicants of Offers of Social Housing

7.1 Where a qualified household refuses two reasonable offers of the allocation of
        different dwellings in any continuous period of one year commencing on the
        date of the first refusal, that household shall not, for the period of one year
        commencing on the date of the second refusal, be considered by the council
        for the allocation of a dwelling to which section 22 of the Act of 2009 applies.
        The latter period shall not subsequently be reckonable in any way for the
        purposes of determining the relative priority of that household for a dwelling
        allocation.

7.2 An offer of a dwelling allocation made by the council will be deemed reasonable
        where, in the opinion of the council, the dwelling offered meets the
        accommodation needs and requirements of the household and the
        dwelling is situated in an area of choice specified by the household. The only
        exception to this is where the council offers to allocate a dwelling to a
        household which has been displaced due to fire, flood or other emergency,
        development, redevelopment or regeneration of a housing area, or on
        exceptional medical or compassionate grounds. In such circumstances, the
        council does not have to offer the household accommodation in any of their
        areas of choice for it to be considered a reasonable offer.

7.3 If a household fails to respond to an offer within 7 working days, after reasonable
       steps have been taken to check that the offer has been received by the
       household, the latter will be deemed to have refused the offer.

7.4 Refusal of offers of accommodation under RAS, H A P , Long- T e r m
       Leasing and or approved housing bodies will be treated by the council as a
       refusal of accommodation.

7.5 Where a qualified household, deemed to be homeless within the meaning of

Section 2 of the Housing Act 1988, refuses a reasonable offer of a dwelling,

including an offer of a dwelling with the benefit of the Housing Assistance

Payment, that meets the accommodation needs of the household, the household

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 12 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
       may not be entitled to be included on the record of qualified households on the
       basis of being homeless within the meaning of Section 2 of the Housing Act 1988.
       In such circumstances, the offer does not have to be in any of their areas of choice
       for it to be considered a reasonable offer. A refusal by a qualified household of
       any offer of a dwelling not within their areas of choice shall not constitute a refusal
       under paragraph 7.1 above.

7.6 The final decision in relation to any allocation of a dwelling will be made by the
       Director of Service, Housing in pursuance of the authority delegated to him
       by Order of the Chief Executive or by any other person so delegated. In
       making this decision, the Director of Service, Housing, or any other person so
       delegated shall have regard to all information furnished by the household in
       support of their application together with all other information relevant thereto
       known to the Director of Service, Housing, or any other person so delegated
       including the household's waiting time on Galway County Council's social
       housing support record of qualified households or transfer waiting list, stated
       preference area(s), family size and type of dwelling required and available for
       allocation.

8. Choice Based Letting (CBL)

8.1 Dwellings: The council will operate a Choice Based Letting Scheme (CBL) to
         enable households qualified for the full range of Social Housing Supports
         on Galway County Councils record of qualified households to exercise
         greater choice and involvement in selecting a new home. A p p r o v e d
         H o u s i n g B o d y d w e l l i n g s , L e a s e d d w e l l i n g s and dwellings owned
         by the council and provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2014 or Part V
         of the Planning and Development Act 2000 may be allocated through CBL.
         However, not all such dwellings which become available for letting will be
         offered through CBL. In particular, sheltered housing units, elderly person
         dwellings and specially adapted wheelchair accessible dwellings will not be
         allocated through CBL.

8.2 Procedure: The procedure for CBL will be in accordance with Regulations 6 to
        11 of the Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011. For the purposes of
        CBL a "qualified household" is household that has been assessed by the
        council under section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009
        as qualified for social housing support. A household to whom a dwelling has
        been provided by an Approved Housing Body is not a qualified household.

         Where dwellings are designated for CBL, dwellings are advertised

· via the Council's website www.galway.ie
· on display at the public counter of the Housing Department of

    Galway County Council at County Hall

The advertisement will show details such as:

 i. the location of the dwelling
ii. details of the dwelling in terms of property type, number of

      bedrooms, size, garden, parking etc.
iii. any restriction on households to whom the dwelling may be

      offered (e.g. size of household)

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 13 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
8.3 Eligibility: Qualified households will be eligible if the bid dwelling is suitable
         for their household size and the council has received the household's bid
         before the deadline for receipt of bids has passed. The council will only
         consider bids from eligible qualified households as per 3.8 above.

8.4 Ineligibility: Qualified households will not be considered for the allocation of
         bid dwellings in respect of which they have not made a bid. Bids made by
         households larger or smaller than the size the bid dwelling is designed for will
         not be successful. The council will also refuse bids from qualified households
         if the bid dwelling does not meet the household's accommodation needs as
         assessed by the council.

Bidding Process: Interested and eligible qualified households can express
their interest in or bid on or before the closing date online at www.galway.ie

8.5 Decision Process: All bids received on or before the closing date will be
         assessed by the council. After the close of the advertising and bidding cycle
         a shortlist of eligible households will be drawn up. The shortlist will identify the
         order of households by placing all eligible bids into priority order. Where
         more than one bid is received for the same dwelling, bids are ranked, and
         an allocation offer is made to the household with the greater priority in
         accordance with the Allocation Scheme. The council will verify that each

         household shortlisted is eligible and that the dwelling is suitable for that
         household's accommodation need.

In circumstances where a shortlisted household is found at this stage to be
ineligible for an offer, the council will disregard that particular household and
move onto the next household in priority on the shortlist.

The top shortlisted household will be required to undergo another social
housing assessment. The council will also consider whether or not the letting
of the bid dwelling to that household would be in the interests of good estate
management prior to that household being offered a bid dwelling. If offered
the bid dwelling, the successful household will be notified by letter.

The household at the top of the shortlist to whom the bid dwelling has been
offered will be given 7 working days to decide whether or not to accept or
refuse the offer of allocation. If there is no response to the offer within the
said 7 working days, this failure to respond will automatically be deemed a
refusal. If the household at the top of the shortlist decides not to accept the
offer of allocation or fails to respond to the offer within 7 working days, the
bid dwelling will immediately be offered to the next household having priority
on the shortlist.

8.6 Refusal of a CBL: Where a household refuses a reasonable offer of the
         allocation of a bid dwelling, or is deemed to have refused such offer, that
         household shall not, for the period of one year commencing on the date of
         such refusal, be entitled to make a further application under CBL to the council
         for the allocation of a bid dwelling. A refusal by a qualified household of an
         offer of the allocation of a bid dwelling made under a CBL scheme shall n o t
         constitute a refusal under paragraph 7.1 above.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 14 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
8.7 The council may, at its discretion, and at any stage prior to allocating a bid
         dwelling, decide to terminate the designation of that dwelling as a bid dwelling
         and not to proceed, or not to continue, with choice-based letting in respect
         of that dwelling.

9. Priorities for Transfers for Local Authority Tenants

9.1 The council has a record of households that have applied to transfer to
          another dwelling. The record consists of a transfer list of existing tenants,
          including tenants of leased dwellings, tenants of dwellings provided under
          the Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS), and qualified households who
          have availed of the Housing Assistance Payment, (HAP) wishing to move to
          another dwelling.

.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 15 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
9.2 All existing council tenants, tenants of leased dwellings, including dwellings
         provided under RAS, and qualified households availing of the HAP scheme
         who are resident within the council's functional area may apply to be placed
         on the council's record of households that have applied to transfer to another
         dwelling.

9.3 The council will give reasonable preference to certain groups of transfer
         applicants and the order of priority to be given to these groups are as follows:

(i)     households whose current accommodation is materially unsuitable for
(ii)    their adequate housing needs;
        households who need to move because their current accommodation
(iii)   does not meet accommodation requirements arising from the
(iv)    enduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual impairment
(v)     of a household member;
(vi)    households who need to move for exceptional medical or
        compassionate reasons;
(vii)   households whose current accommodation is overcrowded
(viii)  within the meaning of section 63 of the Act of 1966;
        households who are under-utilising current accommodation;
        households wh o se cu rre n t a cco mmo d a tio n i s u n s u i ta b l e
        fo r the household's adequate housing needs in any other material
        respect;
        households seeking to enter into an incremental
        purchase arrangement with the consent of the council.
        households originally from the Gaeltacht, whose current
        accommodation is located outside the Gaeltacht, may
        apply to return to live in the Gaeltacht.

9.4 Priority may be afforded to both RAS and leased tenants for transfer at the end
         of contracts.

9.5 Allocations to households on the transfer list will be made taking into account
         all relevant information furnished by the household in support of its transfer
         application together with all other relevant information known to the Director
         of Service, Housing, or the duly delegated housing officer, the date of entry
         of the household onto the transfer list and the household's stated preference
         area(s), family size and type of dwelling required.

9.6 Qualified households who are HAP recipients who apply to be placed on the
         council's record of households that have applied to transfer to another
         dwelling shall retain the specific priority that the household would have had if
         they had remained on the council's record of qualified households, that is to
         say, their priority for transfer will be determined by reference to the date upon
         which they were entered on the council's record of qualified households.

9.7 Subject to 9.4 and 9.6 above, priority will be determined to households in
         these categories by the length of time that the household has been entered
         on the council's record of households that have applied to transfer to
         another dwelling to which section 22 of the Act of 2009 applies and have
         obtained the council's consent to such transfer.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 16 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
9.8 Prior to the allocation of a dwelling on foot of a request for a transfer, the
         council reserves the right to have the following requirements met by the
         household in respect of their existing tenancy:

(a)  The household, excluding households referenced under 9.4 and 9.6

     above, must have resided in the dwelling the subject of its existing

     tenancy agreement for a minimum period of two years prior to the

     date of allocation;

(b)  The household must have a clear rent account for a period of six

     months prior to the date of allocation;

(c)  The household must have a clear refuse and service charge

     account (if any) on the date of allocation;

(d)  The household's existing dwelling must be maintained in a manner

     satisfactory to the council;

(e)  The household must be compliant with all the conditions of its

     existing tenancy agreement;

(f)  The household must agree to sign a Form of Surrender for the

     Tenancy Agreement for the previous council property.

10 Succession to Tenancies

10.1 When a council tenant who is a sole tenant dies or is unable to remain in
         a dwelling for reasons beyond their control (for example, long term
         hospitalisation or imprisonment) it may be possible for a member of the
         tenant's household to succeed to the tenancy. A formal written succession
         application must be made to the council within 2 months of the death or
         departure of the tenant and be accompanied by supporting evidence and
         information to prove their entitlement to succeed. The council may at its own
         discretion decide to grant an extension of time in special circumstances.

10.2 Applicants must furnish any additional information, including documents and
         other particulars, that the council may reasonably request for the purposes of
         verifying information relating to their application.

10.3 On receipt of a succession application, the council will assess the
         application to determine whether or not the applicant has a right to succeed to
         the tenancy.

10.4. In order to succeed to the tenancy of a deceased tenant, an applicant must
         be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the council:

(a)  that they have been resident in the dwelling for a continuous period

     of at least one year prior to the death or departure of the tenant

     or throughout the time of the tenancy if the tenancy has been in

     existence for less than one year.

(b)  that they meet the eligibility criteria to qualify for social housing

     support in accordance with Section 20 of the Housing

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 17 of 26     Effective from 20/05/24
     (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2009 a n d th e S o ci a l Ho u s in g

     Assessment Regulations 2011 as amended.

(c)  that they were an approved occupant of the tenant's household and

     included on the Rent Declaration Form in respect of the dwelling

     for at least one year prior to the death or departure of the tenant.

(d)  that they have not engaged in anti-social behaviour in accordance

     with the terms of Galway County Councils Anti- Social Behaviour

     Policy.

(e)  that they have not caused any breaches to the tenancy agreement

     while residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of a

     warning letter to the tenant under sections 7, 8 or 9 of the Housing

     (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014.

10.5 Applications will not be accepted if a person applying for succession has been
         an unsatisfactory former tenant of the Local Authority or of an approved
         housing body. An unsatisfactory former tenant includes one who has damaged
         a property, has rental and/or non-rent debt outstanding to the council or whose
         tenancy was terminated due to a breach of the tenancy agreement or has
         been involved in illegal or violent activities in any property provided by the
         council or any approved housing body.

10.6 Where there is more than one member of a deceased tenant's household who
         meets the eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 10.4 above, a joint tenancy
         may be granted by the council based on all the circumstances of the
         household and the agreement of the qualifying members of the household to
         enter into a joint tenancy. If the qualifyin g members of the household
         cannot agree amongst themselves to a joint tenancy or who among them
         is to become the sole tenant, the council will grant the tenancy to the eldest
         qualifying member of the household.

10.7 Where a household member is eligible to succeed to a tenancy on the death
         of the previous tenant and the dwelling is in the opinion of the council larger
         than is reasonably required for his or her adequate accommodation needs
         or the dwelling has been designed and adapted for someone with a physical
         disability who no longer resides in the dwelling, the council may not allocate
         that dwelling but will allocate an alternative dwelling suitable, subject to
         availability, for his or her adequate housing that is located as near as
         practicable to the dwelling or in the household member's area of choice.
         Despite the fact that the surviving family members may have lived in a
         particular dwelling for many years, the council will seek and will be entitled to
         recover vacant possession of any under-occupied dwelling in order to ensure
         the best use of their housing stock. The household member will be given
         priority for an allocation of an appropriately sized dwelling and given
         reasonable time to move to the alternative dwelling.

10.8 It may be appropriate in exceptional circumstances to grant a new tenancy to
         a person who does not have a legal right to succeed following the death of a
         sole tenant. Where a sole tenant dies and another person (who does not
         meet the eligibility criteria to succeed to the tenancy) has been living with
         the lawful tenant for the continuous year prior to the tenant's death for the
         purpose of

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 18 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
         providing care for the tenant, or is the legal guardian or custodian of the
         deceased tenant's minor dependents and needs to live with them in order
         to fulfil that role, the council may in its absolute discretion consider granting
         a tenancy to such person, either in the same dwelling or in a suitable
         alternative dwelling, provided the allocation has no adverse implications for
         the good use of the housing stock.

10.9 Under certain circumstances where succession is being considered, the
         council, as part of the succession application, may require the applicant to
         move to another dwelling if it considers the existing dwelling to be too large,
         or has been designed and adapted for someone with a physical disability who
         no longer resides in the dwelling. This may apply despite the fact that an
         applicant may have lived in the dwelling for many years. This is necessary to
         ensure the best use of housing stock and is particularly important in areas of
         high housing demand.

10.10 No succession to tenancy will be considered where the dwelling is designated
         as an Older Persons Dwelling (OPD) and where the person making the
         succession application is not themselves a qualifying elderly person.

10.11 Each succession application will be examined on its own merits and
         applications will be considered where the above conditions have been
         complied with.

11. Succession in Other Circumstances

11.1 In cases where a joint tenant of a dwelling provided by the council vacates the
         dwelling and ceases to reside in the dwelling for a period of at least 1 year, the
         Director of Service, Housing, after due consideration of all the known and
         relevant circumstances (including the non- payment of rent by that joint
         tenant), will approve the allocation of the dwelling to the remaining resident
         joint tenant as sole tenant provided (a) the dwelling is not under-occupied
         and (b) the joint tenant who has remained residing in the dwelling serves
         on the council a Notice to Quit to bring the joint tenancy to an end or both joint
         tenants sign a Form of Surrender of Joint Tenancy.

11.2 In cases where there is an existing tenancy of a dwelling provided by the
         council to tenants who are married but who have executed a Deed of
         Separation or obtained a Decree of Judicial Separation, the Council will have
         regard to the terms of such Agreement or Court Order as the case may be,
         in so far as it relates to the status of the tenancy. In cases where a
         Property Adjustment Order has been made by Court Order, the council will
         give effect to any such Order transferring the tenancy to a sole tenant provided
         a certified true copy of the Court Order is furnished to the council.

11.3 In cases where the sole tenant vacates a dwelling provided by the council,
         leaving a spouse, co-habitant or civil partner in occupation of the dwelling, the
         Director of Service, Housing, after due consideration of all the known and
         relevant circumstances, will approve the allocation of the

        dwelling to the remaining spouse or co-habitant or civil partner (if any) of the
        vacating tenant provided:

(a) A Form of Surrender in respect of the tenancy, witnessed by a
         practicing solicitor, is signed by the tenant and delivered to

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 19 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
               the council,
      (b) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner has resided in the

               dwelling for a period of at least 3 years and has been assessed for
               rent purposes and is not the owner of any property or
      (c) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner who having left the
               dwelling for a period, has returned and resided in the dwelling with the
               lawful tenant with the permission of the council for a period of at least
               1 year prior to the vacating of the dwelling by the tenant and is not the
               owner of any property, and
      (d) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner meets the eligibility
               criteria to qualify for social housing support in accordance with Section
               20 of the Act and the Regulations.

12. Permission to reside as an occupant in Council dwellings

12.1 The prior written consent of the council is required where a tenant wishes to
         have an immediate family member included as an approved occupant. This
         applies to adult children

12.2 The prior written consent of the council is required where a tenant wishes to
         have an additional person reside with them. Applications by a tenant for such
         consent will be considered on their merits and will involve an assessment
         of the following:

         (a) The applicant's reasons for the application;
         (b) The applicant's medical, welfare or compassionate needs;
         (c) The applicant's need for full time care;
         (d) The capacity of the dwelling to accommodate the proposed additional

                   resident having regard to the number of persons already in lawful
                   occupation of the dwelling with the tenant;
         (e) The proposed additional resident's ability to provide housing from his
                   or her own financial resources;
         (f) The proposed additional resident's previous record, if any, as a tenant
                   or resident of a housing authority or approved housing body or as a
                   RAS tenant.
         (g) The verification of the proposed resident's suitability as an occupier.

      Where the Council is of the opinion and is satisfied that the application to
      reside is being made solely in an effort to enable the proposed resident to
      succeed to the tenancy, permission to reside will not be granted.

12.3  The granting of permission to a tenant to have the proposed additional resident
      reside with the tenant does not confer an automatic right on the proposed
      additional resident to succeed to the tenancy in the dwelling and confers no
      entitlement whatsoever on the proposed additional resident to any interest in
      the dwelling. Upon the tenant ceasing to hold the tenancy either through
      surrender, termination, death or otherwise, the approved additional resident will
      be required to vacate the dwelling unless the council decides that Conditions 10
      and/or 11 are applicable.

12.4 The granting of permission to the tenant to have the proposed additional
         resident reside in the dwelling with the tenant for the purpose of caring for the
         tenant for the duration of an illness shall be subject to the lawful tenant

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 20 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
         obtaining independent legal advice prior to the execution of either a Carer's
         Agreement or a Residency Agreement, as the case may be, and producing
         a signed copy of same to the Council together with a certificate from the
         tenant's Solicitor so confirming.

12.5 The council may grant permission to reside as an occupant in a Council
         dwelling for a specified period of time.

      13 Joint Tenancy Application

13.1  A tenant who wishes to have another person named as joint tenant must apply in
      writing to the council. A Joint Tenancy Application Form must be fully completed
      and signed by the tenant and the proposed joint tenant. Joint Tenancy
      Applications will be considered on their merits and will involve an assessment of
      the following:

      (a) The tenant's reasons for the application;
      (b) The capacity of the dwelling to accommodate the proposed joint tenant

             having regard to the number of persons in occupation of the dwelling with
             the tenant;
      (c) The ability of the proposed joint tenant to provide housing from his or her
             own financial resources. A proposed joint tenant must meet the eligibility
             criteria to qualify for social housing support in accordance with Section 20
             of the 2009 Act and the Social Housing Assessment Regulations made
             thereunder.
      (d) The proposed joint tenant's suitability to occupy a council dwelling and in
             this regard, the proposed joint tenant must not
              (i) have engaged in anti-social behaviour for a continuous period

                                 of at least 3 years prior to the date of the application.
             (ii) Have caused any breaches to the tenancy agreement while

                       residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of tenancy
                       warning under sections 7, 8 or 9 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
                       Provisions) Act 2014.

13.2  The council may refuse a joint tenancy application for the following reasons:
      (a) The proposed joint tenant was previously evicted from a local authority

               dwelling for anti-social behaviour or non-payment of rent.
      (b) The proposed joint tenant caused a breach of the tenant's tenancy

               agreement while residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of a
               tenancy warning and such breach continued or was repeated within 12
               months of the tenancy warning coming into effect.
      (c) The proposed joint tenant owes to the council or any other housing
               authority or approved housing body rent or other monies.
      (d) The tenant's dwelling would become overcrowded.
      (e) The tenant's dwelling is unsuitable for the accommodation needs of the
               proposed joint tenant.
      (f) Another persons' rights may be affected.
      (g) The proposed joint tenant is not eligible for the provision of social housing
               support.
      (h) False or misleading information is knowingly provided by the tenant or the
               proposed joint tenant to the council.

13.3 The council will, for the purposes of their functions under the Housing Acts 1966
         ­ 2014, request information pursuant to section 15 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
         Provisions) Act 1997 in relation to the proposed joint tenant from another housing

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 21 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
        authority or approved housing body or a member of An Garda Síochána if the
        council considers that the proposed joint tenant is engaging in or, may have been
        engaged, in anti-social behaviour.

14 Estate Management

         In the interests of good estate management, an applicant household who
         is being considered for an allocation of a dwelling provided by the council
         will be required as a pre-condition of the grant of the tenancy to attend and
         participate in a pre-tenancy course.

15. Downsizing Scheme for the Elderly

15.1 Senior Citizens aged 60 years of over who are owners of private dwellings and
         who find that their existing dwelling is too large for their housing needs may
         apply to the council for senior citizen tenancy accommodation under the
         Downsizing Scheme subject to the payment of a financial contribution, which
         is set at a percentage of the net proceeds of the sale of their private dwelling.
         The council will from time to time, as it sees fit, set aside a particular number
         or proportion of dwellings becoming available for allocation to persons aged
         60 years or over whose application under the Downsizing Scheme is approved.
         The proportion of tenancies to be allocated under the Downsizing Scheme for
         the elderly will be determined from time to time by the Director of Service,
         Housing.

15.2 The council will give priority in the allocation of such dwellings to persons
         aged 60 years or over who are approved for eligibility under the Downsizing
         Scheme.

15.3 The eligibility requirements and the proportion of tenancies to be allocated
         under the downsizing scheme for the elderly will be such as may be
         determined from time to time by the Director of Services, Corporate Services
         & Housing.

15.4 The order of priority of an allocation under the downsizing scheme is as
         follows:

         (a) Persons living in unfit accommodation.
         (b) Persons in need of housing on medical, compassionate grounds.

         (c) Persons who in the option of the council are not able to financially meet
              the cost of maintenance and upkeep of the accommodation they are
              occupying or are financially unable to obtain suitable alternative
              accommodation.

15.5 Subject to the eligibility requirements being satisfied and subject to
         the council's approval of the acquisition of the applicant's existing dwelling,
         the council will consider applications for allocation under the Downsizing
         Scheme. The final decision in relation to an allocation will be made by the
         Director of Service, Housing, having r e g a r d to all information furnished by
         the applicant in support of his application together with all other relevant
         information known to the Director of Service, Housing.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 22 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
15.6 The council reserves the right to grant or not to grant an allocation of a
         dwelling under the Downsizing Scheme. The decision to grant an allocation
         of a dwelling under the Downsizing Scheme shall be subject to the sale by the
         approved applicant to the council of his or her existing dwelling, the execution
         of a Tenancy Agreement, and to the payment of a financial contribution to the
         council on the following basis:

Age                             Financial Contribution

60-69 years          1/3 of net proceeds of sale of dwelling

70-79 years          1/4 of net proceeds of sale of dwelling

80 years and over 1/5 of net proceeds of sale of dwelling

(Net Proceeds shall exclude the discharge of any mortgage on the property and
legal and administrative fees incurred in relation to the sale of the existing
dwelling).

16. Appeals Process

Applicants have the right to appeal decisions made in accordance with this
scheme must do so in writing to the Housing Department, Áras an Chontae,
Prospect Hill, Galway within 14 days of the notification of the decision. A
decision in relation to the appeal must be notified to the applicant within one
month from the date of receipt of the appeal.

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 23 of 26           Effective from 20/05/24
17. Interpretation

In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires: -

A reference to any enactment (whether specifically named or not) or to any section or
sub-section therein shall include any statutory modifications thereof whether by way
of amendment, addition, deletion or repeal and re-enactment with or without
amendment for the time being in force and all statutory instruments, orders, notices,
regulations and directions for the time being made, issued or given thereunder or
deriving validity therefrom.

Any reference to a paragraph by number is a reference to that numbered paragraph
as it appears in this Scheme.

Where the context so admits or requires the masculine includes the feminine and
neuter genders and singular includes the plural.

The headings to the paragraphs of this Scheme are for ease of reference only and
are not to be used for purposes of construing this Scheme.

`anti-social behaviour' shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 1(1) of
the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1997 (as amended). It includes either or
both of the following, namely -

         (a) the manufacture, production, preparation, importation, exportation,
                   sale, supply, possession for the purposes of sale or supply, or
                   distribution of a controlled drug (within the meaning of the Misuse of
                   Drugs Acts, 1977 to 2007),

         (b) any behaviour which causes or is likely to cause any significant or
                   persistent danger, injury, damage, alarm, loss or fear to any person
                   living, working or otherwise lawfully in or in the vicinity of a house
                   provided by a Housing Authority under the Housing Acts, 1966 to
                   2014 and part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000, or a
                   housing estate in which the house is situate and, without prejudice to
                   the foregoing, includes

                  (i) violence, threats, intimidation, coercion, harassment or serious
                             obstruction of any person

                  (ii) behaviour which causes any significant or persistent
                             impairment of a person's use or enjoyment of his or her home,
                             or

                  (iii) to or defacement by writing or other marks of any property,
                             including a person's home.

`bid dwelling' means a dwelling that has been designated for choice-based letting

`choice based letting' means the procedure set out in Regulations 6 to 11 of the
Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 for determining the individual
households that will be considered for the allocation of a bid dwelling

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 24 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
 `emergency' is an emergency decided as such by the Director of Service, Housing,
 Corporate and Emergency Services or his nominated official whose decision in this
 regard shall be final

 `overcrowding' is to be construed in accordance with Section 63 of the Housing Act,
 1966 so that a dwelling shall be deemed to be overcrowded at any time when the
 number of persons ordinarily sleeping in the dwelling and the number of rooms in the
 dwelling either:-

          (a) are such that any two of those persons, of opposite sexes and not
                     being persons living together as husband and wife, must sleep in the
                     same room, or

           (b) are such that the free air space in any room used as a sleeping
                     apartment, for any person is less than four hundred cubic feet (the
                     height of the room, if it exceeds eight feet, being taken to be eight feet,
                     for the purposes of calculating free air space.

For the purpose of assessing how many bedrooms are required the following table will
apply:

          · 1 or 2 bed dwellings may be offered to an individual or to a couple,
          · 2 bed dwellings are offered to a couple or lone parent with one child, or

                 two adults not living as a couple e.g. parent and adult child; or individual
                 and carer,
          · 3 bed dwellings are offered to a couple or lone parent with two, three, or
                 four children on the basis that children of the opposite sex and adults of
                 the opposite sex not living as a couple are not required to share a
                 bedroom, or any three adults where none are living as a couple,
          · 4 bed dwellings are offered to households consisting of a couple or lone
                 parent with four, five or six children on the basis that children of the
                 opposite sex and adults of the opposite sex not living as a couple or any
                 four adults where no two are living as a couple,
          · 5+ bed dwellings are offered to households consisting of a couple or lone
                 parent with six or more children.
          · Separated families. In relation to separated families where one parent
                 already occupies a Local Authority dwelling, where 2nd parent has
                 access to their children, the 2nd parent qualifies for that family bed
                 category less 1 bedroom. e.g. Parent with access to children who
                 require a 3 bed unit. If they have full access, they qualify for a 3Bed unit,
                 If shared/weekend access, they qualify for a 2 bed unit.
          · Sharing of bedrooms. Sharing of bedrooms between same sex adult
                 children and their younger siblings should be avoided where
                 possible. This is where there is a large age gap. e.g. under 10 & over
                 18

`RAS tenant' means the tenant of a dwelling which is the subject of a rental
accommodation scheme

`Scheme' means this Allocation Scheme.

`the 2009 Act' means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 (No. 22 of
2009)

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 25 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
`social housing support' has the meaning assigned to it by section 19 of the 2009
Act `unfit' has the meaning assigned to it by section 66 of the Housing Act 1966

          ADOPTED BY GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL ON THE 20th MAY 2024

Housing Allocation Scheme 2024  Page 26 of 26  Effective from 20/05/24
