COMHAIRLE CHONTAE ÁTHA CLIATH THEAS
       SOUTH DUBLIN COUNTY COUNCIL

  ALLOCATION SCHEME

                            In accordance with
Section 22 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act

                                   2009 And
   Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011 (SI 198 of
   2011) As adopted by South Dublin County Council on

                              8th May 2019 and
                     amended, 14th December 2020

                                                1
Introduction                              3

South Dublin County Council Housing List  4

Choice Based Letting                      4

Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)          6

Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS)         7

Priority                                  8

Medical Grounds                           9

Succession of Tenancy                     12

Succession in other circumstances         13

Joint Tenancy Application                 15

Older Persons                             17

Refusal of Offers                         18

Appendix                                  19

                           2
Introduction

The purpose of this Allocation Scheme, made pursuant to Section 20 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009, is to provide a means of determining the order
of priority to be afforded in the allocation of social housing support to persons whose
eligibility and need for accommodation has been assessed in accordance with
Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 and associated
regulations as being qualified for social housing support and to provide for
determining the order of priority for households who have applied for transfer to
another dwelling and for incremental purchase.

This scheme recognises the need to achieve a balance in allocating dwellings
between the needs and preferences of applicants, the wellbeing of existing tenants
and the community as a whole, and the need to make the best use of the social
housing stock in the South Dublin County Council administrative area.

In the allocation of social housing stock, the Council is obliged to have regard to its
housing services plan and the need to counteract undue segregation in housing
between persons of different social backgrounds and ensure that a mix of dwelling
types and sizes and of classes of tenure is provided to reasonably match the
requirements of households.

This scheme is aligned to all relevant internal and national housing plans and
strategies.

The scheme applies to the allocation of the following dwellings:

·             Council owned dwellings;

·             Council leased dwellings,

·             Rental Accommodation Availability Agreement dwellings (RAS) and

·             Dwellings owned by Approved Housing Bodies to whom assistance is

              given under section 6 of the Act of 1992 for the purposes of such

              provision.

The Scheme sets out the requirements and procedures for transfers of tenants
of:

·             Council owned dwellings;

·             Contracted or leased dwellings,

·             rental accommodation availability agreement dwellings (RAS) and

·             dwellings owned or leased by Approved Housing Bodies to whom

              assistance is given under section 6 of the Act of 1992 for the purposes

              of such provision.

·             those accommodated under the Housing Assistance Payment Scheme

              (HAP Transfer list)

                                         3
·  any additional social housing schemes

South Dublin County Council Housing List

South Dublin County Council operates Housing and Transfer lists and all offers of
accommodation and allocations are made from these lists.

Applicants assessed as qualifying for social housing support are placed on the
housing list. Applicants assessed but deemed not eligible will be not placed on the
list and any applicant who is reassessed but deemed not eligible will have their
application cancelled and be removed from the list. All assessments are carried out
in accordance with Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009
and associated regulations.

All eligible applicants, those deemed in need of social housing support following
assessment, will be considered on a `time on list' basis other than those in respect of
whom the order of priority may be disregarded under section 22(7) of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 applies.

The Choice Based Lettings (CBL) initiative is the Council's chosen method of
allocating properties and will continue to be implemented with applicants being
offered the opportunity to express an interest in a suitable available home. CBL
affords qualified households greater choice and involvement in selecting a new
home.

Applicants on the Housing List should consult the Council's designated website on a
weekly basis in order to check for suitable advertised properties. The successful
applicant, i.e. the applicant longest on the Housing List of those who expresses
interest, will be contacted immediately and offered the advertised property (subject to
reassessment,). If the applicant has not been successful they will not be contacted
by the Allocations Section and can apply for the next set of advertised properties.

The successful applicant will be determined strictly in accordance with the terms of
this Allocations Scheme i.e. the applicant who will get the allocation will be the
applicant whose position on the list is highest of those expressing an interest in the
available home and subject to good estate management.

In the case of equality of date of qualification, the final decision will be made by the
Chief Executive who will have regard to all the circumstances including the size of
the families involved.

All offers will be considered in line with the South Dublin County Council anti-social
policy. Applicants will be investigated, by way of Garda check, in accordance with the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions Act) 1997 and applicants involved in anti- social
behaviour will not be considered for inclusion on the housing list for a period of one
year. Applicants engaging in Anti-Social Behaviour equivalent to Category "A" Status
in the Council's Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy will not be considered for inclusion on
the housing list for a period of two years. These periods will be subject to a rolling
review process. The Council's Anti-social behaviour strategy is available to download
on the Council's website.

   4
The Council may refuse to offer accommodation to an applicant due to refusal
or failure by the applicant to disclose or furnish information/documentation
either relevant to the application or required for good estate management
purposes.
Nothing in the scheme shall prevent the Chief Executive making an allocation
in emergency circumstances.

                                                           5
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
The Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) is a form of social housing
support which is available to households who have been deemed eligible
for inclusion on South Dublin County Council's housing list. Current rent
supplement recipients who qualify for social housing support will be
transferred from rent supplement to HAP on a phased basis.
HAP recipients who wish to do so will be able to access other social
housing supports such as local authority housing or housing provided by
an AHB. The HAP recipient, if they choose, will move onto the HAP
transfer list when the HAP tenancy begins. This transfer list will reflect
the time that the recipient previously spent on the housing list and the
effective date for the recipient's position on the HAP transfer list will be
their date of qualification for social housing support. All those on the
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) Transfer List will have access to CBL
and are eligible to express interest in accommodation advertised. The
refusal policy outlined previously applies.

                                                 6
The Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) & Applicants Sourced Homes (ASH)

The Rental Accommodation Scheme is an initiative to cater for people who are in
receipt of Rent Supplement and who have been living in the private rented sector for
eighteen months or more. Under the scheme South Dublin County Council enters
into direct contracts with Landlords and tenants for the properties for a specified
time, usually a minimum of four years.

In order to apply, a landlord must be tax compliant and their property must pass an
inspection to ensure the accommodation meets required standards.

In the interest of good estate management, checks are carried out on all potential
RAS tenants.

RAS tenants who are in need of a transfer to alternative accommodation through no
fault of their own, as a result of Lease Expiry or non-renewal by their current
landlord, will be given a specific priority for alternative RAS accommodation or can
source their own accommodation under the RAS scheme.

All RAS tenants must:

·  Have a clear rent account for six months or have an agreement in

   place and being adhered to by the tenant to address any such arrears

   over an agreed period of time

·  Have kept their RAS dwelling in satisfactory condition, subject to

   inspection have complied with the conditions of their Tenancy

   Agreement and

·  Have no record of anti-social behaviour.

Offers of accommodation under the RAS scheme will be recorded and refusals of
any such offers will be taken into account in the same way as refusals of offers of
Council and AHB accommodation. Only two reasonable offers of accommodation will
be made.

RAS tenants on the RAS fixed transfer list will also retain access to CBL.

RAS and ASH Tenants on a Notice To Quit and until alternative accommodation is
found will have access to Choice Based Letting.

                       7
Priority

The Council may set aside for persons of such category or categories as the
authority may decide, a proportion of the dwellings becoming available to the
authority for allocation and priority may be afforded to the specified categories in the
allocation of these dwellings.

In certain circumstances, THE ORDER OF PRIORITY UNDER THIS ALLOCATION
SCHEME MAY BE DISREGARDED IN RESPECT OF applicants that satisfy the
following criteria subject to the availability of suitable accommodation at the time:

·  Households living in dangerous premises on whom a requisition under

   Section 3 (9) of the Local Government (Sanitary Services) Act, 1964

   has been served.

·  Displacement (resulting from acts of the Local Authority).

·  Households rendered homeless through no fault of their own or evicted

   through no fault of their own on foot of a Court order, who are regarded

   by the housing authority as homeless the meaning of section 2 of the

   Housing Act 1988.

·  Exceptional /compassionate grounds.

·  Medical grounds

·  Persons aged 55 or over in response of older persons' accommodation

   (in accordance with the Policy for Rightsizing and Allocation of Age

   Friendly Accommodation).

Such applicants may be given an allocation of available accommodation based on
time on the list and subject to the availability of suitable accommodation at the time.

                             8
Medical Grounds
Where housing accommodation is sought on grounds consisting of or including
medical grounds, regard shall be had to the report of the Council's Medical
Advisors.
Those applicants qualifying under medical grounds and not needing specially
adapted accommodation will also continue to have access to the Choice Based
Letting (CBL) which will take account of their time on the housing list.
Those who do need specially adapted accommodation will not have access to
Choice Based Letting (CBL).

                                                             9
Transfer

Tenants of the Council, including tenants of dwellings provided under the Social
Housing Leasing Initiative, RAS or by Approved Housing Bodies may apply for
consideration for a transfer to other dwellings, under the following circumstances:-

(a) overcrowding;
(b) where older persons and other households wish to move to smaller
accommodation (downsizing);
(c) medical/compassionate reasons;
(d) on grounds of anti-social behaviour where the Council's Estate
Management Liaison Officer and a Garda Superintendent support the transfer
application;
(e) other exceptional circumstances.
(f) To facilitate incremental purchase, where the authority has consented
to such a purchase.

Notwithstanding the above, tenants seeking a transfer must fulfil the following
requirements to the satisfaction of the housing authority ­

·         Occupy their present dwelling under a tenancy agreement, for a period

          of at least two years, unless the tenancy agreement provides

          otherwise;

·         have a clear rent account for 6 months or have an agreement in place

          and being adhered to by the tenant to address any such arrears over

          an agreed period of time;

·         have kept their dwelling in satisfactory condition, subject to inspection;

·         have complied with the conditions of their Tenancy Agreement and

·         have no record of anti-social behaviour.

In the case of emergency or exceptional medical/compassionate grounds, the
housing authority may forgo any or all of the above conditions in granting a transfer
to alternative accommodation at the discretion of the Chief Executive.

Preference may be given to a household in receipt of social housing support in a
property that is not owned by the Council and the house is no longer available to
them through no fault/act of their own; i.e. rental accommodation availability
arrangements, long term leasing initiatives etc.

Where application is made on grounds consisting of or including medical grounds,
regard shall be had to the report of the Council's Medical Advisors.

                                     10
The provisions specified in this scheme regarding refusals will also apply to
applicants for a Transfer.

RAS Tenants are deemed to be adequately housed but may opt to be included on
the Transfer list and will be eligible for transfer to other RAS dwellings under the
following circumstances:

·  overcrowding

·  where older persons and other households wish to move to smaller

   accommodation (downsizing);

·  medical/compassionate reasons;

RAS Tenants seeking a transfer must

·  hold the tenancy in their present dwelling, for a period of at least two

   years,

·  have a clear rent account for 6 months or have an agreement in place

   and being adhered to by the tenant to address any such arrears over

   an agreed period of time

·  have kept their RAS dwelling in satisfactory condition, subject to

   inspection;

·  have complied with the conditions of their Tenancy Agreement and

·  have no record of anti-social behaviour.

Two offers, which are reasonable in the opinion of the housing authority, of
alternative accommodation in their chosen areas will be made. No further offer will
be made and the applicant will be removed from the transfer application list. RAS
tenants may be considered for an alternative RAS, SDCC, AHB or social housing
leasing initiative tenancy.

Nothing in the Scheme shall prevent the Chief Executive granting a transfer in
emergency circumstances.

Mutual Transfers

Mutual transfers may be facilitated where the following criteria are met:

·  the household must have occupied their present dwelling under a

   tenancy agreement, for a period of at least two years, unless the

   tenancy agreement provides otherwise.

·  Clear rent account ­ this condition may be waived on exceptional

   compassionate grounds.

·  Compliance with terms of tenancy during existing tenancy

·  Acceptance of both parties to occupy dwellings in existing condition.

·  Meets the housing need of both parties and

·  Have no record of anti-social behaviour.

The Council will maintain a register of tenants who have requested to be included on
such a register for the purpose of seeking a Mutual Transfer.

Tenants of other housing authorities will be considered for mutual transfers with
tenants of South Dublin County Council subject to conditions agreed upon by both

                                     11
authorities and will also be included on the Register of Tenants for Mutual Transfer
upon request.

Allocation of Tenancies as a result of a death or reasons beyond the control of
a tenant

When a council tenant who is a sole tenant dies or is required to surrender the
tenancy for reasons beyond their control (for example, long term hospitalisation or
imprisonment) it may be possible to allocate the tenancy to a member of the tenant's
household in the following circumstances and at the discretion of the housing
authority:

Spouse/Partner

The tenancy may be given to a surviving spouse/partner provided:

·  Such spouse/partner has been resident in the dwelling for a continuous

   period of at least two years prior to the death of the tenant and

·  has been included in the assessment for rent purposes for that period

Household member

The tenancy may be granted to the next member of the household, provided that the
person has continued to reside in the house as their normal place of residence
continuously for a minimum of five years up to and including the time of
bereavement/surrender and has been assessed for rent purposes for that period.

Where there are two or more surviving members of the family who meeting the
criteria above, a joint tenancy may be granted by the Council.

Under some circumstances where such an allocation is being considered, the
housing authority may require the household to move to another property if it
considers the property to be too large or the property has been designed or adapted
for the use of someone with a disability who no longer resides in the property. No
such allocation will be considered where the property has been designated as an
Older Persons Dwelling (and where the person applying for the tenancy is not an
elderly person).

A formal written application must be made to the council within 3 months of the death
or departure of the tenant and be accompanied by supporting evidence and
information to prove their entitlement for consideration under this provision, including
having been assessed for rent purposes for the requisite time up to and including the
time of bereavement/surrender.

The council may at its own discretion decide to grant an extension of time in special
circumstances.

Applicants must furnish any additional information, including documents and other
particulars, that the council may reasonably request for the purposes of verifying
information relating to their application.

                                                            12
The following conditions will apply:

There must be a clear rent account ­ this condition may be waived on exceptional
compassionate grounds.
Compliance with terms of tenancy during existing tenancy Acceptance to occupy
dwellings in existing condition Meets the housing need of applicant.
Have no record of anti-social behaviour.

Applicants (other than spouses) must meet the eligibility criteria to qualify for
social housing support

Allocation in Other Circumstances

Departure - Desertion

In cases where a joint tenant of a dwelling provided by the council vacates the
dwelling and ceases to reside in the dwelling for a period of at least one year, South
Dublin County Council, after due consideration of all the known and relevant
circumstances (including the non-payment of rent by that joint tenant), may approve
the allocation of the dwelling to the remaining resident joint tenant as sole tenant.

Departure - Marital/Partnership/Couple Breakdown

In cases where there is an existing tenancy of a dwelling provided by the council to
tenants who were married but who have executed a Deed of Separation or obtained
a Decree of judicial separation/divorce, the Council will have regard to the terms of
such Agreement or Court Order as the case may be, in so far as it relates to the
status of the tenancy. In cases where a Property Adjustment Order has been made
by Court Order, the council will give effect, subject to the terms of the order, to any
such Order transferring the tenancy to a sole tenant provided a certified true copy of
the Court Order is furnished to the council. If the order is unclear in its effect, the
applicant must ensure it is clarified /corrected.

In cases where the sole tenant vacates a dwelling provided by the council, leaving a
spouse, co-habitant or civil partner in occupation of the dwelling, the Director of
Service, after due consideration of all the known and relevant circumstances, may
approve the allocation of the dwelling to the remaining spouse or co-habitant or civil
partner (if any) of the vacating tenant provided:

    a) A Form of Surrender in respect of the tenancy, witnessed by a practicing solicitor, is
         signed by the tenant and delivered to the council,

    b) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner has resided in the dwelling for a
         period of at least two years and has been assessed for rent purposes and is not the
         owner of any property or the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner who
         having left the dwelling for a period, has returned and resided in the dwelling with the
         lawful tenant with the permission of the council for a period of at least l year prior to
         the vacating of the dwelling by the tenant and is not the owner of any other property,
         and

                                                            13
c) the remaining spouse, co-habitant or civil partner meets the eligibility criteria to
    qualify for social housing support with South Dublin County Council.

Applicants must furnish any additional information, including documents and
other particulars that the council may reasonably request for the purposes of
verifying information relating to their application.
The following conditions will apply:

    · There must be a clear rent account ­ this condition may be waived on
         exceptional compassionate grounds.

    · Compliance with terms of tenancy during existing tenancy
    · Acceptance to occupy dwellings in existing condition
    · Meets the housing need of applicant
    · Have no record of anti-social behaviour.

                                                       14
Joint Tenancy Application

A tenant who wishes to have another person named as joint tenant must apply in
writing to the council. A Joint Tenancy Application Form must be fully completed and
signed by the tenant and the proposed joint tenant. Joint Tenancy Applications will be
considered on their merits and will involve an assessment of the following:

    a) The tenant's reasons for the application.
    b) The capacity of the dwelling to accommodate the proposed joint tenant having

         regard to the number of persons in occupation of the dwelling with the tenant.
    c) The ability of the proposed joint tenant to provide housing from his or her own

         financial resources. A proposed joint tenant must meet the eligibility criteria to
         qualify for social housing support in
    d) accordance with Section 20 of the 2009 Act.
    e) Any property owned by the applicant.
    f) Eligibility to form part of the tenant's household as defined in the act of 2009.

The proposed joint tenant's suitability to occupy a council dwelling and in this regard,
the proposed joint tenant must not

        (i) Have engaged in anti-social behaviour for a continuous period of at least
             three years prior to the date of the application.

        (ii) Have caused any breaches to the tenancy agreement while residing in the
             dwelling that necessitated the issue of tenancy warning under sections 7,
             8 or 9 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 20 1 4.

The council may refuse a joint tenancy application for the following reasons:

    (a) The proposed joint tenant was previously evicted from a local authority
         dwelling for anti-social behaviour or non-payment of rent.

    (b) The proposed joint tenant caused a breach of the tenant's tenancy agreement
         while residing in the dwelling that necessitated the issue of a tenancy warning
         and such breach continued or was

    (c) repeated within twelve months of the tenancy warning coming into effect.
    (d) The proposed joint tenant owes to the council or any other housing authority

         or approved housing body rent or other monies.
    (e) The tenant's dwelling would become overcrowded.
    (f) The tenant's dwelling is unsuitable for the accommodation needs of the

         proposed joint tenant.
    (g) Another persons' rights may be affected.
    (h) The proposed joint tenant is not eligible for the provision of social housing

         support.

                                                            15
    (i) False or misleading information is knowingly provided by the tenant or the
         proposed joint tenant to the council.

    (j) Estate management reasons
GENERAL
The council will, for the purposes of its functions under the Housing Acts 1966 -
2014, request information pursuant to section 15 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1997 in relation to any housing applicant, including a proposed joint
tenant, from another housing authority or approved housing body or a member of An
Garda Síochána.

                                                            16
Older Persons

Existing Council tenants, aged 55 or older, may apply for a move to a specific older
persons' accommodation in accordance with the terms of the Policy for Rightsizing
and Allocation of Age Friendly Accommodation.

Approved social housing applicants, aged 55 or over, will be considered for specific
older persons' accommodation in accordance with the terms of the Policy for
Rightsizing and Allocation of Age Friendly Accommodation. However, such
applicants can also apply for including on Choice Based Letting for applications for
other accommodation where appropriate.

Approved applicants under the Community List, aged 55 or over, will be considered
for specific older persons' housing accommodation in accordance with the terms of
the Policy for Rightsizing and Allocation of Age Friendly Accommodation.

The Council will operate a Financial Contribution Scheme where Older Persons, who
are owners of private dwellings and who find their existing dwelling too large for their
needs, may apply for accommodation in designated Older Persons Dwellings subject
to the payment of a financial contribution scheme as follows:

Applicant's Age                        Financial Contribution
60-64 years (on medical grounds only)  1/2 of net proceeds of sale
65-69 years                            1/3 of net proceeds of sale
70-79 years                            1/4 of net proceeds of sale
80 years and over                      1/5 of net process of sale

The Council will operate a Community List for access to older persons'
accommodation by such persons currently in ownership of private accommodation in
accordance with the Policy for Rightsizing and Allocation of Age Friendly
Accommodation.

                                       17
REFUSAL OF OFFERS

A refusal of offer made under Choice Based Letting constitutes a refusal under this
Allocations Scheme.
Applicants, who without a satisfactory explanation, refuse two reasonable offers of
different dwellings made by any housing authority in the relevant application area
within a continuous period of one year commencing on the date of first refusal, will
not be considered by any housing authority for the allocation of a dwelling the which
section 22 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 applies, for the period
of one year commencing on the date of the second refusal. This latter period will not
be considered for `time on list' purposes.
In the case of a qualified household, qualifying on medical grounds refuses two
reasonable offers of a dwelling that meets the accommodation needs of the
household, the household may not, for the period of one year commencing on the
date of such second refusal, be entitled to be included on the record of qualified
households for housing on medical grounds.

Homeless
Where a qualified household, deemed to be homeless within the meaning of Section
2 of the Housing Act 1988, refuses two reasonable offer of a dwelling that meets the
accommodation needs of the household, the household will have their priority status
removed and will instead be considered for social housing based on their time on the
housing list through CBL.
Homeless emergency services including emergency accommodation will be
removed and if necessary, the applicant will have to source and resource their own
emergency accommodation.
This applicant is deemed to have made themselves homeless.

                                                            18
                                                 APPENDIX
Explanatory information regarding the allocations scheme

Who can apply for social housing support with South Dublin County Council?

The following considerations will apply where applications are received by the
Council for inclusion in the assessment of housing needs.

1. Eligibility Applicants must be aged 18 or over and must have long term
         permission to reside in the State or otherwise comply with the requirements of
         the State for residence.

2. Applicants must reside in the functional area of South Dublin County Council.
         Applicants residing outside the functional area of the Council may be included
         to such extent that (a) they have a local connection to the functional area or
         (b) at the Council's discretion

(a) Local Area Connection

·  Member of household has resided for a continuous five year period at

   any time in the area or

·  Employment of any member of household is in the area or is located

   within 15 kilometres of the area or

·  A household member is in full-time education in any university, college,

   school or other education establishment in the area or

·  A household member with enduring physical, sensory, mental health or

   intellectual impairment is attending a related educational or medical

   establishment in the area that has facilities or services specifically

   related to such impairment

·  A relative of any household member lives in the area and has lived

   here for a minimum of two years

(b) Council Discretion

Applicants who are accepted under Council's discretion cannot indicate Areas of
Choice outside of the Council's functional area.

Area of Choice

Applicants must express at least 1 area of choice in the Council's functional area and
may also express Area of Choice in the other Dublin Authorities ­ Dublin City
Council, Dun Laoire/Rathdown and Fingal ­ but overall they may only express 3
Areas of Choice. Such applicant's details will be forward to the relevant authority.
Applicants shall indicate in writing their preferred Housing Areas. Applicants may be
offered suitable accommodation within any estate within their chosen Housing Areas

                               19
of Choice. Area of Choice cannot be altered for 12 months, date of expression of
Area of Choice will be listed separately to date of application.

Assessment of Housing Need

This is carried out under Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 and regulations made under it. Applicants will be considered for housing
accommodation only where the Council is satisfied that their financial or other
circumstances are such as to render it impossible, without hardship for them to
provide adequate accommodation from their own resources.

Applicants whose household income exceeds the maximum income threshold as set
out in the national household means policy as it refers to South Dublin County
Council. The threshold presently is detailed below:

Max Income     Maximum        Calculation as follows;
Threshold ­    income         35,000 + 5% for each adult housing member
single person  threshold ­ 3  subject to a maximum allowance of 10% and
NET            adult & 4      2.5% for each additional child, subject to a
               children NET   maximum allowance of 10%
35,000
               42,000

Income will be assessed using government departments shared services, on the
basis of applicant's P21 and/or P60 for the preceding tax year, a minimum of four out
of the last six payslips or a minimum of 2 years accounts, where appropriate.

Any income which you have deprived yourself of in the 2 years leading up to
application will also be considered.

Where applicants are in receipt of a social welfare payment, a statement from the
Department of Social Protection is required.

Social Housing Need Assessment will be carried out on a regular basis while an
applicant remains on the housing list.

Any other special financial circumstances of a housing applicant may also be taken
into account in calculating household income.

Where applicants are owners or joint owners of dwellings, or tenants or joint tenants
of local authority dwellings, but are not living in these dwellings owing to relationship
breakdown, such applicants may be considered for housing accommodation if a
formal legal agreement has been entered into, or in comparable circumstances at
the discretion of the Chief Executive, or having regard to any orders of the Court and
the Council is satisfied with the housing provision of the agreement, and where it
would not be possible for such applicants, due to financial or other circumstances, to
provide adequate accommodation from their own resources. In the case of joint
owners a legal agreement contracting to provide a financial contribution from the
proceeds of the sale of the house will be required if applicable.

                              20
In assessing homeless persons, the Council will have regard for recommendations
from its Homeless Assessment and Placement Service who shall, in the course of
investigating the circumstances of applicants for homeless priority, consult with
relevant statutory and non-government agencies as appropriate.

The following minimum standards for bedroom accommodation will apply to lettings
made by the Council

Single person or Couple (Certain 1-bed units may  1 ­ bed
be designated for older persons only)
Lone Parent or Couple with 1 or 2 children        2 ­ bed
Lone Parent or Couple with 3 or 4 children        3 ­ bed
Lone Parent or Couple with 5 or more children     4 ­ bed

Applicants with partial custody/access arrangement to children may on production of
relevant legal documentation be deemed to have a two bedroom need

Applicants are required to complete the Council's Pre-Tenancy Course before being
allocated any accommodation.

In order to examine and consider applications for housing accommodation, the
Council may inspect and examine applicants' housing circumstances and may
require applicants to furnish documentary evidence to support their applications.

Change in circumstances: Where, after the making of an application, the
circumstances of the applicant change (e.g. change of address, birth of a child,
change in medical circumstances, changes in income, changes in the number of
persons residing or to reside with the applicant, etc.), it is the household's
responsibility to inform the council of any such change. The council will review the
household's application following any such notification.

Applicants `time on list' will commence on the date the applicant is approved
for social housing support.

21
Cancellation of applications

    1. An application shall be excluded from consideration if the applicant refuses
         access to existing accommodation (by the Council's nominated Inspectors),
         supplies false information or withholds relevant information either on the
         application form, income details or in subsequent interviews or inspections. If
         an allocation is made on the basis of false, incorrect or out of date
         information, such allocation will subsequently be rescinded and the offer
         withdrawn or if a tenancy has already been created in such circumstances,
         such tenancy will be terminated.

    2. False or misleading information: Where a person who is a member of a
         household requested to give information to the local authority under Section
         32 of the 2009 Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act knowingly gives false
         or misleading information, that person is guilty of an offence. Applicant(s)
         providing false/misleading information may be prosecuted and may be liable
         to a fine.

    3. The Council may disregard the accommodation an applicant is occupying
         where the Council has reason to believe that the applicant has deliberately or
         without good and sufficient reason remained in, or taken up occupation of,
         unsuitable accommodation primarily to improve the prospects of obtaining
         local authority housing.

    4. Applicants who take up illegal occupation of a local authority dwelling will not
         be considered for a tenancy of a dwelling unless the dwelling the applicant
         occupies illegally is willingly surrendered to the Council in the same condition
         it was in prior to the illegal occupation.

    5. The council will disregard the accommodation that a household is occupying
         where the council has reason to believe that the household has deliberately,
         or without good and sufficient reason, done or failed to do anything (other
         than an action or omission in good faith) the consequence of which the
         accommodation the household is occupying is less suitable for the
         household's adequate housing than other accommodation which it would have
         been, or would be, reasonable for the household to occupy.

    6. Former local authority tenants who apply for re-housing will only be placed on
         the housing list if the following conditions are complied with:

                      a. A period of two years has elapsed since the surrender of
                           previous tenancy (may be waived in exceptional circumstances)

                      b. The rent account on their previous tenancy is clear, or a
                           satisfactory arrangement acceptable to the local authority is

                                                            22
                           made to clear any arrears due and is maintained for a period of
                           at least six months. However, no offer of accommodation will be
                           made until arrears are clear.
                      c. Compliance with the terms of tenancy was satisfactory during
                           their previous tenancy.

                      d. Any costs that were incurred by the local authority in carrying
                           out repairs to the tenant's former dwelling which were the
                           tenant's responsibility must be refunded to the Council by the
                           tenant in full, or a satisfactory arrangement is entered into to pay
                           the cost of these repairs. Any such arrangement must be
                           maintained for a period of at least six months.

Time on list will only accrue when all outstanding charges are cleared.

    7. Former local authority tenants who have abandoned their property or been
         evicted may be recognised as having a housing need but will not be
         considered for inclusion on the housing list for a period of five years and only
         if the following conditions are complied with:
             a. The rent account on their previous tenancy is clear, or a satisfactory
                  arrangement acceptable to the local authority is made to clear any
                  arrears due and is maintained for a period of at least six months

             b. Any costs that were incurred by the local authority in carrying out
                  repairs to the tenant's former dwelling which were the tenant's
                  responsibility must be refunded to the Council by the tenant in full, or a
                  satisfactory arrangement is entered into to pay the cost of these
                  repairs. Any such arrangement must be maintained for a period of at
                  least six months.

Permission to reside as an occupant in Council dwellings

The prior written consent of the council is required where a tenant wishes to have an
additional person reside with them. Applications by a tenant for such consent will be
considered on their merits and will involve an assessment of the following:

    a) The tenant's reasons for the application.
    b) The tenant's medical, welfare or compassionate needs.
    c) The tenant's need for full time care.
    d) The capacity of the dwelling to accommodate the proposed additional resident

         having regard to the number of persons already in lawful occupation of the
         dwelling with the tenant.
    e) The proposed additional resident's ability to provide housing from his or her
         own financial resources.
    f) The proposed additional resident's previous record, if any, as a tenant or
         resident of a housing authority or approved housing body or as a RAS tenant.

                                                            23
    g) The verification of the proposed resident's suitability as an occupier, including
         checks pursuant to section 15 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
         1997.

    h) The proposed additional resident's eligibility for social housing support.

Where the Council is of the opinion and is satisfied that the application to reside is
being made solely in an effort to enable the proposed resident to apply for the tenancy
or the death or departure of the tenant, permission to reside will not be granted.

The granting of permission to a tenant to have the proposed additional resident reside
with the tenant does not confer any right on the proposed additional resident to an
allocation of the dwelling on the death or departure of the tenant and constitutes no
entitlement, expectation or right whatsoever in the proposed additional resident to any
interest in the dwelling. Upon the tenant ceasing to hold the tenancy either through
surrender, termination, death or otherwise, the approved additional resident will be
required to vacate the dwelling unless the council decides otherwise.

The granting of permission to the tenant to have the proposed additional resident
reside in the dwelling with the tenant for the purpose of caring for the tenant for the
duration of an illness shall be subject to the lawful tenant obtaining independent legal
advice prior to the execution of either a Carer's Agreement or a Residency Agreement,
as the case may be, and producing a signed copy of same to the Council together with
a certificate from the tenant's Solicitor so confirming.

The Irish Refugee Protection Programme has increased commitments on resettlement
and the commencement of the new Humanitarian Admission Programmes. Operating
under discretionary Ministerial powers, the Irish Refugee Protection Programme
Humanitarian Admission Programmes will provide an opportunity to Irish citizens and
persons with Convention refugee status, subsidiary protection status, and programme
refugee status, who have immediate eligible family members from named countries of
refugees, to propose to the Minister for these family members to join them in Ireland.
Permission must be received from the Local Authority before any applications may be
made where social housing dwellings are involved.

Appeals

An applicant may appeal any decision by applying in writing to the Allocations Officer,
South Dublin County Council, County Hall, Tallaght Dublin 24

The allocations officer will have the primary responsibility in relation to the
interpretation of any matter concerning this Allocations Scheme. However, this
decision may be appealed to the relevant Senior Executive Officer.

                                                            24
