HOUSING
ALLOCATIONS SCHEME

(Scheme of Letting Priorities)

Adopted by Tipperary County Council Elected Members on 13th
September 2021
Section 1:  Introduction
Section 2:  1.1 The Purpose of the Scheme
            1.2 Which Houses does the Scheme apply to?
Section 3:  1.3 Designation of Particular Dwellings
            1.4 Exceptions
Section 4:  1.5 Ratio for Allocation of Vacancies
Section 5:
            Housing List
Section 6:  2.1 Manner in which dwellings are allocated
Section 7:  2.2 Waiting Time
Section 8:  2.3 Housing Areas
Section 9:  2.4 Assessment of Bedrooms Required
            2.5 Children in Shared Custody/Access
            2.6 Requests for Extra Bedrooms
            2.7 Refusal to Allocate
            2.8 Allocation Conditions
            2.9 Determination of Basis of Need
            2.10 Change in Circumstances

            Transfers
            3.1 Grounds for Transfer Applications
            3.2 Transfer Requirements
            3.3 Exceptional Transfers
            3.4 Applications from tenants of AHBs or Other Local

                     Authorities
            3.5 Extensions to Local Authority Dwellings

            Approved Housing Body (AHB)
            4.1 Nomination

            Homeless
            5.1 Homeless Persons
            5.2 Consideration of Basis of Need
            5.3 Determination of Social Housing Support
            5.4 Housing First
            5.5 Young People Leaving Care
            5.6 People Leaving Prison

            Succession to Tenancy
            6.1 Succession to Tenancy
            6.2 Allocation Conditions for Succession
            6.3 Existing Local Authority Tenancies

            Refusals of Tenancy

            Choice Based Letting

            General

                                                                                            1|Page
Section 1  Introduction

1.1        The Purpose of the Scheme

The purpose of the Allocation Scheme is to determine the basis for prioritising the
allocation of all housing support to persons hereunder:

a. persons assessed as being qualified for social housing support in accordance
    with Section 20 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2009 (and
    associated regulations);

b. persons transferring from a Tipperary County Council (TCC) tenancy or
    other housing support including Approved Housing Body (AHB), Social
    Housing Leasing Initiative, Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) and
    Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) and, including transfers to new
    dwellings being purchased under the Incremental Purchase Scheme.

1.2        What Houses does the Scheme apply to?

Dwellings provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 (and as amended) or
Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (and as amended)­

a. of which the housing authority is the owner,

                                                       or

b. of which the housing authority is not the owner and which are provided
    under a contract or lease between the housing authority and the owner
    concerned, including rental accommodation availability agreements and
    leasing

                                                     and

c. dwellings owned and provided by Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) to whom
    assistance is given under section 6 of the Housing Act 1992 for the purposes
    of such provision.

1.3        Designation of Particular Dwellings

The following special conditions shall apply in respect of the Allocation Scheme for
the Letting of Dwellings:

The housing authority may, from time to time, as they see fit, designate a
particular number or proportion of dwellings becoming available to the Authority
for allocation for all or any of the following purposes:

                                                  2|Page
a. allocation to particular classes of household as set out hereunder, e.g.
    persons with disabilities, thus affording priority in the allocation of those
    dwellings to approved households in the relevant category of need;

       i. People with Disabilities: Including physical, sensory,
              intellectual/learning or mental health disability.

       ii. Traveller Households: Households who wish to be housed in
              standard Local Authority/AHB/LTL/RAS social housing
              accommodation and/or in traveller specific accommodation.
              Accommodation under this category will be provided in
              accordance with the Council's Traveller Accommodation
              programme.

b. allocation to households transferring from other forms of social housing
    support (e.g. RAS Units, Voluntary Housing Units) and leased units;

c. for particular forms of tenure, including an Incremental Purchase dwelling
    - the procedure applied by the housing authority for an Incremental
    Purchase Scheme will be as set out in Part 3 of the 2009 Act and the Housing
    (Incremental Purchase) Regulations 2010 (S.I. No. 252 of 2010).
    Properties are designated by Manager's Order for use for Incremental
    Purchase Schemes

d. for allocation under Choice Based Lettings (CBL)

e. for allocation under Housing First

f. for allocation under START

g. for allocation as emergency accommodation

h. for allocation under licence type agreements

i. for allocation for community use

j. for any other programme for specific cohorts of vulnerable persons as
    determined by Members

1.4  Exceptions

The housing authority may disregard the order of priority given to a household
under an allocation scheme where the household is being provided with social
housing support in the following circumstances: -

    · persons in need of accommodation arising from specified exceptional
         circumstances, including displacement by fire, flood or any other
         emergency, development, redevelopment or regeneration of an area by the
         housing authority, or exceptional medical or exceptional compassionate
         grounds;

    · in a dwelling let to the household under a Chapter 4 tenancy agreement
         having been assessed under Section 20 (3), i.e. RAS accommodation.

                 3|Page
In the allocation of RAS accommodation, the Housing Authority will have regard
to the length of time a household has been in receipt of rent supplement; the
length of time a household has been on the waiting list for social housing support,
or a combination of both; and will be subject to the terms set out at 2.7 Refusal
to Allocate.

1.5        Ratio for Allocation of Vacancies

Vacancies will be allocated on a pro-rata basis whereby 60% of vacancies will be
allocated from the housing list and 40% will be allocated from the transfer list.

Tipperary County Council are conscious that a significant number of applicants
whom are approved on the basis of "unsuitable accommodation ­ particular
household circumstances" have been approved for over 5 years. In order to
address this, at least 10% of vacancies within each of the lists will be allocated
based on length of time on the list.

Section 2  Priority Need for Social Housing Support

2.1        The manner in which dwellings are allocated

Applicants assessed as being qualified for social housing support are placed on the
Housing List.

The list of qualified households will be prioritised in the following order:

           a) preference shall be given to applicants living in dwellings deemed
           to be dangerous as defined in Section 3 of the Sanitary Services Act,
           1964 or being displaced by operations of the Local Authority
           b) preference shall be given to applicants deemed to be homeless
           under Section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988
           c) preference shall be given to applicants living in dwellings deemed
           to be unfit as defined in Section 66 of the Housing Act, 1966
            d) preference shall be given to applicants with exceptional
            medical/compassionate grounds
           e) preference shall be given to applicants living in dwellings deemed
           to be overcrowded as defined in Section 63 of the Housing Act, 1966
            f) preference shall be given to applicants in need of housing who
            are deemed to have a need based on disability ­ physical/mental
            health/sensory/intellectual
            g) preference shall be given to applicants in need of housing who are living
            in unsuitable accommodation having regard to the particular household
            circumstances in accordance with 23 (f) Social Housing Assessment
            Regulations 2011
            h) preference shall be given to applicants in need of housing who are
            dependent on Rent Supplement
           i) preference shall be given to persons who are sharing
           accommodation with another person or persons and who, in the

                                                                                                              4|Page
     opinion of the Housing Authority, have a reasonable requirement for
     separate accommodation
     j) preference shall be given to persons who are, in the opinion of the
     Housing Authority, not reasonably able to meet the cost of their mortgage
     and are unable to obtain suitable affordable alternative accommodation

2.2  Waiting Time

Whilst allocations will be made in accordance with the above order of priority,
where a number of applicants fall within the same category, regard shall be had
to length of time that has elapsed since the applicant qualified for inclusion as a
qualified applicant for housing by the housing authority.

2.3  Housing Areas

An applicant may select up to 3 areas for consideration within the Tipperary
County Council functional area.

An applicant may only change/amend areas of choice once in any 12 month period.

2.4  Assessment of Bedroom Requirement

Overcrowding is deemed to exist where two persons of opposite sex, not being
spouses or partners and both aged 10 years or over sleep in the same room due
to lack of accommodation.

When assessing need for accommodation based on overcrowding, the application
will be assessed on the following basis:

                           Household Composition    No. Of Bedrooms
Single Person, Couple                               1
Single Parent/Couple with 1 or 2 children under 10  2
Single Parent/Couple with 3 or 4 children under 10  3
Single Parent/Couple with 5 or 6 children under 10  4

Once a child is aged over 10, the requirement for an additional bedroom will be
examined.

                                                    5|Page
2.5 Children in Shared Custody/Access Arrangements

Tipperary County Council will assess separated parents with partial custody/access
arrangements and the following will apply to assignment of bedroom need:

    a) Children of parents living apart will be recorded in the assessment of each
         parent (providing they submit the relevant documentation) but the type
         and extent of accommodation which they require will be assessed taking
         into consideration the extent to which their needs are met in the household
         of the other parent.

    b) Tipperary County Council assigns multiple bedroom unit requirements to
         the parent with whom the children reside for the greater part and a reduced
         number of bedrooms to the other parent.

2.6 Requests for Extra Bedrooms

A request for an extra bedroom (additional to that which would be ordinarily
required by a household of the applicant's size) on exceptional medical grounds
for the purpose of a carer to stay in the house at night may be considered and be
assessed on a case by case basis by TCC, who may seek a recommendation from
the appointed medical officer, having regard to medical reports submitted.

This will be facilitated on an exceptional needs basis only.

2.7 Refusal to Allocate

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 or in an
Allocation Scheme made under section 22 of the 2009 Act, the housing authority
may use its right under Section 14(1) (as amended) of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1997 to refuse to allocate or defer the allocation of a dwelling to
a person where -

a) The authority considers that the person is/has been engaged in anti-social
    behaviour or that an allocation to that person would not be in the interest of
    good estate management, or

b) The person fails to provide information, including information relating to
    persons residing or to reside with that person, which is requested by the
    housing authority and which the authority considers necessary in connection
    with an application for an allocation

c) Subject to any further provisions contained within the housing authority's
    adopted Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy.

d) Where an allocation is deferred as a result of anti social behaviour, the deferral
    shall continue until such time as the Local Authority is reasonably satisfied that
    the anti social behaviour is unlikely to re-occur in the future.

                                                                                                              6|Page
e) Where a person illegally occupies a Local Authority dwelling, he/she shall not
    be considered for allocation of social housing supports for a period of 5 years.
    This 5 year period will not be reckonable as time on list when being considered
    for vacancies in the future.

f) Where an applicant for housing assistance has voluntarily surrendered social
    housing they may not be considered for Social Housing Support for a period of
    3 years from the date of the said surrender except in the case of permanent
    marriage dissolution or relationship breakdown, whereby an application may
    be considered after a period of 12 months.

g) Where an applicant for housing assistance has abandoned social housing they
    may not be considered for Social Housing Support for a period of 5 years from
    the date of the said surrender

h) Where a former tenant has caused damage to a Local Authority property and
    is now seeking rehousing, no consideration will be given to the application until
    such time as the cost of repair of the dwelling (excluding normal wear and tear)
    has been repaid and for a period of 3 years.

2.8 Allocation Conditions

    a) Allocations may be subject to a report by the relevant Community Liaison
         Officer (CLO) having regard to the past history of the applicant and the
         principles of good estate management.

    b) All applicants whom have been allocated a property and have accepted
         same must complete Pre Tenancy Training prior to taking up occupation of
         the accommodation (unless exempted from doing so for exceptional
         reasons and in such scenarios, tenancy training to occur within the 1st
         three weeks of occupation).

    c) Any applicants whom are currently living in an unauthorised mobile
         home/caravan, of which they are the owner/occupier MUST remove same
         (or arrange to have same removed if not the owner) prior to taking up
         tenancy in the allocated dwelling and dispose of to an acceptable facility
         as indicated in writing by the LA. In the event that this is not complied
         with, Tipperary County Council will arrange for the removal of same and
         will retrieve cost of disposal from the applicant.

    d) In certain circumstances, it may be necessary to offer an applicant a
         temporary tenancy. In this instance, the applicant remains on the
         transfer list and will be considered for vacancies in their areas of choice
         subject to a satisfactory tenancy and no change in circumstances.

                                                                                                              7|Page
    e) Applicants may be allocated a dwelling subject to engagement with
         Tenancy Sustainment Services ­ the requirement for TSS will be
         determined by the individual's circumstances.

2.9 Determination of Basis of Need
    a) The housing authority may, in certain circumstances, disregard any
         applicant's present accommodation and circumstances, if the Council has
         reason to believe that the applicant has, deliberately or without good
         cause and sufficient reason, remained in or taken occupation of unsuitable
         accommodation primarily to improve the prospects of obtaining a tenancy
         from the Council or sought to significantly worsen their financial situation
         through reduced working hours or through other means.
    b) Where priority is claimed on Disability/Medical Grounds, the applicant
         shall submit a a fully completed HMD Form, signed by 2 Healthcare
         Practitioners.

            i. Only medical evidence relating to persons included on the
                   application will be assessed. Medical evidence relating to other
                   occupants in the dwelling will not be considered.

            ii. Approval on the basis of disability or medical will only be awarded
                   where an offer of housing would in a material way improve or
                   stabilise the health or disability of the applicant, relieve the
                   condition from which they are suffering and/or significantly improve
                   their ability to cope with that condition.

           iii. Where priority is awarded, this priority may cover a particular type
                   of accommodation and/or accommodation in a particular area.

           iv. The Council in considering the awarding of a priority claimed on
                   medical grounds may seek a recommendation from a medical
                   practitioner/consultant appointed by the Council.

           v. An Occupational Therapist report must be provided where there is a
                   need for a specific accommodation requirement.

                                                                                                              8|Page
2.10 Change in Circumstances

In the event that an approved applicant's circumstances have changed since the
decision to approve them has been made, the applicant should immediately notify
Tipperary County Council.

All changes in circumstances will be examined to ascertain whether there is a
requirement to amend the decision to approve the applicant and/or to amend the
basis of need, number of bedrooms or house type.

In the event that the notification of change in circumstances results in an
amendment to the number of bedrooms, house type or basis of need, the original
date of approval will continue to be used.

Section 3  Transfers

3.1        Grounds for Transfer Applications

In the interests of trying to address the significant waiting list over the next 3
years, application for transfers will be tightly managed and only approved where
there is a very strong rationale to facilitate same.

In this context:-
Tenants of the Housing Authority, including tenants of dwellings provided under
the Social Housing Leasing Initiative, RAS, HAP or by AHB's may apply for
consideration for a transfer to other dwellings, under the following
circumstances:

a) overcrowding;
b) where older persons and other households wish to move to smaller

    accommodation (downsizing);
c) exceptional medical/exceptional compassionate reasons on grounds of

    significant anti-social behaviour where the Housing Authority's Community
    Liaison Officer and An Garda Síochána support the transfer application and
    where all attempts at resolution have failed ;
d) other exceptional circumstances;
e) to facilitate incremental purchase, where the authority has consented to
    such a purchase.

Accepted transfer applicants will be placed on the list from the date they made
their transfer application.

                                              9|Page
The list of qualified households will be prioritised in the following order:

         The list of qualified households will be prioritised in the following
         order:
         a) preference shall be given to applicants deemed to be homeless
         under Section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988
         b) preference shall be given to applicants with exceptional
         medical/compassionate grounds
         c) preference shall be given to applicants living in dwellings deemed
         to be overcrowded as defined in Section 63 of the Housing Act, 1966
         & as amended
         d) preference shall be given to applicants in need of housing who
         are deemed to have a need based on disability ­ physical/mental
         health/sensory/intellectual
         e) preference shall be given to applicants in need of housing who are living
         in unsuitable accommodation having regard to the particular household
         circumstances in accordance with 23 (f) Social Housing Assessment
         Regulations 2011

3.2      Transfer Requirements

Tenants seeking a transfer must fulfil the following requirements:

a) Hold  tenancy         in  their           present  dwelling                         [Local

Authority/Voluntary/RAS/Leased/HAP for a period of at least 2 years, unless it

is a temporary tenancy.

b) A clear rent account for at least 6 months and the rent account not to be in
    arrears for an accumulated period of 12 weeks or more at any time in the 3
    years preceding the transfer application. Any transfer will take account of rent
    arrears but allowances may be made where an agreement is in place, and being
    adhered to by the tenant to address any such arrears over an agreed period of
    time.

c) All service and other charges paid up to date.

d) Have kept their dwellings in a satisfactory condition, subject to inspection.

e) Have complied with all aspects of any previous tenancy agreement with any
    Housing authority.

f) Have no record of anti-social behaviour.

No transfer shall take place until the written consent of the local authority has
been received.

No mutual transfers shall take place until the written consent of the local authority
has been received.

                                                                    10 | P a g e
3.3  Exceptional Transfers

In the case of emergency or exceptional medical/exceptional compassionate
grounds, the Housing Authority may forego any or all of the conditions in
granting a transfer of tenancy, for example:

     a. Tipperary County Council tenants displaced by fire or flood
     b. Applicants requiring specifically adapted units where their current

             accommodation has been deemed unsuitable for modifications under a
             DPG

Priority may be given to a household in receipt of social housing support in a
property that is not owned by the Housing Authority and the house is no longer
available to them through no fault/act of their own; i.e. rental accommodation
availability arrangements, long term leasing initiatives etc.

Tenants who were transferred to RAS prior to the introduction of the Social
Housing Assessment Regulations 2011, on the 01 April 2011, will be given credit
for their time on the housing waiting list from the date of their approved housing
application, where they apply to transfer to another form of social housing
support, and were on the housing list since they commenced their RAS tenancy.
Allocations shall be made to such tenants in accordance with the Order of
Priorities as per above.

3.4  Applications from tenants of AHBs or Other Local

     Authorities

Tenants of other Local Authorities may be considered for inclusion on the Housing
List providing there are exceptional circumstances warranting this.

Transfers between tenants of Tipperary County Council and tenants of another
Housing Authority or Approved Housing Body may be permitted, provided the
conditions agreed between the two Authorities and the conditions of this scheme
for such transfers are fully met.

3.5  Extension to Local Authority Dwellings

In exceptional cases, where an existing tenant of a local authority dwelling is
seeking a transfer on the basis of overcrowding, an extension to the dwelling
may be considered.

Any consideration of proceeding with an extension will have regard to the budget
available to the Local Authority, the existing dwelling and the impact an
extension would have on same and the principles of good estate management
and the availability of other more suitable property in the area.

                                             11 | P a g e
Section 4  Approved Housing Body (AHB) Accommodation

4.1        Nomination for houses provided by AHB

Applicants whom have been approved may be considered for nomination for
vacancies with an AHB.

The selection process for suitable nominees to an AHB will be based on the same
criteria as any applicant for housing with Tipperary County Council i.e. bedroom
requirement, basis of need etc.

The nomination is forwarded to the AHB and the applicant is notified of their
nomination to the AHB by Tipperary County Council.

Failure to engage with the AHB regarding the nomination and assessment
process or refusal of the offer will be taken into account the same way as refusals
of offers of Tipperary County Council accommodation.

All nominations to dwellings owned and provided by Approved Housing Bodies
shall also follow the order of priority of this scheme.

Section 5  Homeless Persons

5.1        Homeless Persons:

As per Section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988 a person shall be regarded as
homeless if in the opinion of Tipperary County Council the person is unable to
provide accommodation from his/her own resources and:

a. There is no accommodation available which in the opinion of Tipperary
    County Council the applicant together with any other person who
    normally resides with him/her or who might reasonably be expected to
    reside with him/her, can reasonably occupy or remain in occupation of

                              OR

b. The applicant is living in a hospital or other such institution and is so living
    because he/she has no accommodation of the kind referred to in
    paragraph (a)

                                                  12 | P a g e
5.2  Consideration of Basis of Need:

The following will be considered as part of determining the basis of need having
regard to homelessness:

a. Whether the applicant meets the social housing need criteria
b. Whether the applicant has voluntarily surrendered a tenancy
c. Whether the applicant has been asked to leave a tenancy by reason of a

    breach of tenancy including rent arrears and anti social behaviour
d. Whether the applicant has satisfactorily engaged with services to secure

    HAP/Private Rented accommodation
e. That consent has been given to be discussed at Tipperary County Councils

    Homeless Action Team (HAT) meeting and details allowed to be updated
    on PASS.

5.3  Determination of Appropriate Social Housing Support

On presentation of an individual to the Local Authority as Homeless, the
individual will be assessed by the Homeless Prevention Officer. In the event that
the individual does not have an application for social housing support, he/she
will be requested to complete one.

If the applicant has been approved for social housing support he/she will be
provided with the assistance of the HAP Placefinder Service if it is deemed
appropriate.

In exceptional circumstances a decision may be made to provide emergency
accommodation on a short term basis. However, it is expected that the
individual will actively engage with the HAP Placefinder to secure private rented
accommodation thereafter.

Tipperary County Council will determine the appropriate housing support to be
offered to applicants assessed as having an accommodation need based on
homelessness.

5.4  Housing First

Tipperary County Council may set aside a number of dwellings for homeless
households for Housing First all of which will have robust wrap around supports
from all of the necessary services.

5.5  Young People Leaving Care

In accordance with the Protocol for Young People Leaving Care, Túsla will
continue to establish Aftercare Steering Committees in line with their structures
and that of Housing Authorities, to manage the local transition of young people
leaving State care. Both the Agency and Housing Authorities are represented on
Aftercare Steering Committees.

                                      13 | P a g e
Tusla's Aftercare Service will refer the young person to the Aftercare Steering
Committee when the young person is 16 years, where appropriate to do so, to
ensure that appropriate services are informed and work in partnership to plan
and deliver services. This information sharing is vital to inform the young
person's Preparation for Leaving Care Plan and Aftercare Plan.

Where social housing is assessed as the most appropriate form of
accommodation for a young person leaving the care of the Agency, the Housing
Authority's representative will meet with the young person (prior to their 18th
birthday) and Tusla's Aftercare Service and shall provide information on housing
options and processes.

The Housing Authority will have regard to all housing supply options available
that may be utilised to support the accommodation needs of young people
leaving the care of the Agency.

Where the assessment of accommodation needs of the young person leaving the
care of TUSLA determines that social housing is the most appropriate form of
accommodation for that young person, the provision of such social housing will
be subject to availability of suitable housing.

When the young person reaches 21 years, the housing needs of young person in
question will be managed through the existing arrangements to address Adult
Homelessness.

5.6        Persons Leaving Prison

Individuals whom are currently incarcerated and who have informed their Prison
Resettlement Worker that they have no accommodation available to them on
release will make an application for housing through their Resettlement Officer
prior to the scheduled release date.

The application will be processed and assessed prior to the release date.

The applicant will then be further processed having regard to the procedure at
5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 above.

Section 6  Succession

6.1        Succession

In the event of the death of one of the tenants in a joint tenancy, the tenancy
will ordinarily be transferred to the surviving tenant or the spouse/Civil partner,
provided that he/she has been continuously resident in the dwelling for a
continuous period of at least two years immediately prior to the death of the
tenant and has been declared for and assessed for rent purposes for that entire

                                   14 | P a g e
period. Periods of residence not declared for rent assessment purposes are not
applicable.

In the event of death of both tenants, or the vacating of the dwelling for reasons
of long term care, the tenancy will ordinarily be transferred to the member of
the family longest residing provided that:

a) He/she having an assessed social housing need is living in the house and
    has been declared/assessed for rent purposes, for a continuous period of
    at least 2 years immediately prior to the death or departure of the tenant
    and they meet the criteria of 6.2 below.

b) Where there are two or more surviving members of the family who meet
    the criteria above, a joint tenancy may be granted. Where agreement
    cannot be reached regarding the family member to succeed, the dwelling
    automatically reverts to the Housing Authority.

Where a legal separation/divorce exists, regard will be had by the housing
authority to the terms of that agreement in the consideration of any application
for succession to a tenancy.

Where there is no legal separation or divorce agreement and where the housing
authority is satisfied that a spouse/Civil partner has vacated the tenancy for a
period of at least 24 months, the housing authority may consider an application
for succession to the tenancy from the remaining spouse/civil partner and
approve the tenancy if considered appropriate.

Where a person other than a spouse/Civil partner is a joint tenant of a dwelling
and has not resided in that dwelling for a period of at least 24 months, the
housing authority may consider an application for succession from this remaining
tenant and approve the tenancy if considered appropriate.

6.2  Allocation Conditions for Succession

All Succession to Tenancy Applications are subject to the following:

a. Must have been determined to have a social housing need
b. Residing in their present dwelling [Local Authority/Voluntary/RAS/Leased]

    for a period of at least 2 years
c. Have complied with all aspects of any previous tenancy agreement with

    any Housing authority (if applicable)
d. Have no record of anti-social behaviour
e. Property suitable and will not result in tenant being over accommodated

Successions will only be considered for immediate family members and or those
who have already been approved for permission to reside there. Under some
circumstances where succession is being considered, the housing authority may
require the family member to move to another property if it considers the
property to be too large or the property has been designed or adapted for the
use of someone with a disability who no longer resides in the property. No
succession to the tenancy will be considered where the property has been

                                                                      15 | P a g e
designated as an Older Persons Dwelling (and where the person applying for
succession is not an elderly person).

Where a household has qualified for succession and cannot be allocated the
existing accommodation due to the property being too large, designed or
adapted for the use of someone with a disability or is designated elderly,
Tipperary County Council will offer the household alternate accommodation.
Where this household refuses 2 reasonable offers of alternative accommodation,
the said household will no longer have an entitlement to succession and will be
provided with a HAP pack so as to vacate the current property.

The Council reserves the right to assess each application on its merits and in the
interest of good estate management.

Where an individual has been determined to have a housing need, Tipperary
County Council may, at it's own discretion forego any or all of the conditions as
listed above at 6.2 (b)(c) & (e), in granting a succession of tenancy where it
considers that exceptional circumstances exist. (note: grief associated with the
loss of a loved one and the strong emotional connections with one's home are
not deemed to be grounds for exceptional circumstances)

6.3        Existing Local Authority Tenancies

a. All people whom wish to reside in a L.A. property including RAS, Long Term
    Lease and L.A. properties will be required to complete Permission to Reside
    Application form. All Applicants must demonstrate that they have a social
    housing need.

b. Joint tenancy Applications will not be accepted after the original allocation is
    complete and the tenant has taken occupancy of the property. The original
    applicant whom was assessed as having a housing need and was offered the
    tenancy will always be the tenant/s.

c. Tenancies must be surrendered in writing to the relevant Local Authority by
    each tenant. The keys of the property must only be submitted to an
    employee of the Local Authority.

Section 7  Refusals

a. Where a qualified household refuses 2 reasonable offers of the allocation of
    different dwellings made by one or more than one housing authority in the
    relevant application area in any continuous period of one year commencing on
    the date of the first refusal, the said household shall not, for the period of one
    year commencing on the date of the second refusal, be considered by any
    housing authority for the allocation of a dwelling to which section 22 of the Act
    of 2009 applies and the latter period shall not subsequently be reckonable in
    any way for the purposes of determining the relative priority of that household
    for a dwelling allocation.

                                               16 | P a g e
b. An offer of a dwelling allocation by the housing authority shall be deemed to
    be reasonable where, in the opinion of the housing authority, the
    accommodation offered, would meet the accommodation needs and
    requirements of the household and the dwelling is situated in an area of choice
    specified by the household. The only exception to this is where the Housing
    Authority makes an offer because of specified exceptional circumstances,
    including displacement because of fire, flood or other emergency,
    development, redevelopment and regeneration of an area or exceptional
    medical and exceptional compassionate grounds. In these circumstances, the
    Housing Authority does not have to offer the household accommodation in their
    area of choice for it to be considered a reasonable offer.

c. Where an offer of housing is made to a transfer applicant to specifically address
    an issue and the applicant refuses this offer, the decision to qualify that person
    for a transfer may be reviewed.

d. Refusals of offers of accommodation offered under RAS/Leasing or Approved
    Housing Body will, for the purposes of its refusal policy, be treated as a refusal
    of accommodation for the purpose of this Allocation Scheme.

e. The processing of refusals and appeals of same will be carried out in accordance
    with the Council's Policy in relation to Refusals of Offers of Tenancy.

Section 8  Choice Based Letting

The procedure applied by the housing authority for Choice Based Lettings will be
as set out in Sections 6 ­ 11 of the Social Housing Allocation Regulations 2011. In
accordance with Regulation 12 (4), a refusal of an offer made under a CBL shall
not constitute a refusal as per Section 7 Refusals (above) - In accordance with
Regulation 10(1), where an applicant refuses a reasonable offer of a CBL, the
household cannot bid for another CBL dwelling for 1 year. Properties are
designated by Manager's Order for use for Choice Based Lettings.

Applicants are permitted to bid for properties in any area within the County and
are not confined to the 3 areas on their application form. However where there
are a number of applicants for the same property and all have the same priority
need, first consideration will be given to the individual who had identified the
location as one of their preferred areas.

The allocation of CBL vacancies will be allocated on a 60:40 basis.

Section 9  General

a. The housing authority will endeavour to investigate each applicant's previous
    housing history and reserves the right to seek all relevant information from
    other Local Authorities and other statutory agencies such as The HSE, Túsla;

                                 17 | P a g e
    Probation Services, or An Garda Síochána with particular reference to anti-
    social behaviour.

b. The housing authority may from time to time review this allocation scheme,
    and revise it by way of amendments to the scheme or make a new scheme,
    subject to the approval of the Housing Authority. Before making or amending
    an allocation scheme, the housing authority shall provide a draft of the scheme
    or amendment to the scheme, as the case may be, to the Minister, who may
    direct the Housing Authority to amend the draft scheme or draft amendment,
    and the Housing Authority shall comply with any such direction within such
    period as may be specified by the Minister. The making of the allocation scheme
    is a reserved function of the Council.

c. A copy of the Scheme will be available for public inspection on the housing
    authority's website at www.tipperarycoco.ie and at the Housing Department at
    Civic Offices, Emmet Street, Clonmel and Civic Offices, Limerick Road, Nenagh
    during normal working hours.

d. Every applicant approved for housing support will be advised of the Housing
    Authority's allocation scheme.

e. In the interest of good estate management the housing authority will have
    regard to the need to sustain a balanced community.

f. Where a housing applicant withholds information or provides false or
    misleading information, such information being material to their application,
    the Council, at it's absolute discretion, shall have the right to:
       i. Withhold an offer of accommodation
       ii. Suspend the application for a period of time
      iii. Close the application

g. In deciding which sanction should apply, in any given case the Council will have
    regard to the extent to which the information was likely affect any decisions,
    actually made or prospective in relation to the application.

h. Any person who is aggrieved by the Housing Authority's decision has the right
    to appeal within 14 days of the Housing Authority's decision. A letter setting
    out the grounds of appeal should be addressed in writing to:-
    Tipperary County Council: Senior Executive Officer, Housing

                                                                                                            18 | P a g e
