Comhairle Contae
Loch Garman
FOGRA CRUINNITHE
voexford
County Council
pc/bb
613 Feabhra, 2019.
Meeting of Wexford County Council
On Monday 11th February, 2019 — 2.30 p.m.
In the Council Chamber, Wexford County
Council, Carricklawn, Wexford.
A Chara,
Tionålfar cruinniü de'n Chomhairle mar a léiritear thuas. Tå süil agam go mbeidh tü i
låthair.
Beidh Clår ordaithe an Bhainisteöra ar fail i rith an chruinnithe.
Mise, le meas,
Padraig O'Coileäin,
Runai
Comhairle Contae
Loch Garmam
Wexford County
Council
An Charraig Leathan, Loch Garman
Carricklawn, Wexford Y35 WY93
053 919 60001postmaster@wexfordcoco.ie
www.wexfordcoco.ie I www.twitter.com/wexfordcoco
County Council Meetinq — 11th February, 2019.
i. Confirmation of Minutes:
1.1 County Council Meeting — 14th January, 2019.
2. Proposed disposal of land under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001:
3,
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
2.1 Proposed disposal of land at McCurtain Street, Gorey, Co. Wexford to the Health Service
Executive, Lacken, Dublin Road, Kilkenny.
2.2 Proposed renew of lease of property known as Westgate Computer Centre at Wexford,
Wexford to Access 2000 Wexford CLG.
Part XI of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8, of the
Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 (as amended):
3.1 LAC 1809 — Proposed development of existing site to provide 39 no. social housing units
with auxilary and associated siteworks at Rosetown, Rosslare, Co. Wexford.
Audit Committee Reports
Audit Committee commentary on the contents of the 2017 Accounts and audit findings in
accordance with Section 60 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014
Overview of Audit Committee work programme completed during 2018 in accordance with
section 15 of the Local Government (Audit Committee) Regulations 2014
Audit Committee's proposed work programme for 2019
Draft 2019 Annual Service Delivery Plan
Local Elections Update
LCDC Report
Report of Corporate Policy Group
Chief Executive's Report
10. List of Councillors' Conferences and Training
Attendance at London/Wexford Association Functions on 27th April 2019 and 26th October
2019.
e Conference Report of Cllr. J. O'Rourke — E.U. Cohesion Policy- Carlingford, Co. Louth
Conference Report of Cllr. F. OSüilleabhåin — The Finance Act 2018 — Carlingford, Co.
Louth.
2.
11. Minutes of Meetings:
11.1 Borough District ofWexford 17.12.18
I I .2 Gorey Municipal District 18.12.18
1 1.3 Enniscorthy Municipal District 17.12.18
11.4 New Ross Municipal District 12.12.18
12. Sealing of Documents
13. Correspondence and Communications
o Acknowledgement letter from the Office of the Taoiseach
o Email acknowledgement from the Office of the Minister for Health
14. Deferred Notices of Motion:
14.1 Cllr. T. Forde:
We ask that Wexford County Council seriously consider and take steps to end the over
reliance of privately run bed and breakfasts or hotels for emergency accommodation. We ask
that Wexford County Council recognise the unsuitability of the current emergency
accommodation model and to examine the possibility of acquiring and using more actual
houses that could be operated by the council or in coordination with other housing
organisations for the provision of emergency accommodation."
14.2 Cllr. T. Forde:
"We calf on Wexford County Council to formulate and to make public a written mental health
policy for housing which may include a clear protocol when dealing with tenants with mental
health concerns and to •include menta! health issues as a priority in the allocation of housing"
14.3 Cllr. G. Carthy:
"That Wexford County Council immediately re-install the vehicular access to the beach at
Seaview, Kilmore. This commitment was given to the local community and the emergence
services in May of 2018 and to date has not been acted on".
15. Notices of Motion
15.1 Cllr. J. Mythen:
"That this Council sends solidarity and support to our nurses and midwives whom have
legitimately balloted their members to take strike action, to secure restoration of pay with a
safe fully staffed, functioning Health service, that values and pays them as essential skilled
workers"
15.2 Cllr. T. Forde:
"Maidir leis an Ghaeilge agus iarracht a dhéanamh f a chur chun cinn agus Seachtain na
Gaeilge a cheiliüradh gach Mårta: "larraim go spreagfaidh an Chomhairle seo go gniomhach
üsåid na Gaeitge ag cruinniü Mi Mhärta de Chomhairle Contae Loch Garman gach bliain.
larraimid ar bhaill atå compordach leis üsåid a bhaint as år dteanga-an Ghaeilge chun moltai,
comhghairdeas agus comhbhrön a thairiscint"
3.
"In an effort to promote the Irish language and to mark Seachtain na Gaeilge every March, I
ask that this Council actively encourage the use of Gaeilge at the March meeting of Wexford
County Council every year by asking members of the council who are comfortable using the
language to consider submitting motions and to offer congratulations and sympathies as
Gaeilge."
15.3 Cllr. M. Doyle:
"In support of events to mark the sitting of the first Dåil and in recognition of it's historic
importance, I propose that Wexford County Council take this opportunity to recognise the
core principles of the Democratic Programme of the First Dåil by displaying a framed copy of
the document in a prominent place in this chamber."
15.4 Cllr. R. Ireton:
"On behalf of Aitheantas I am calling on Wexford County Council to write to Minister
Zappones Department requesting/demanding that her Department acknowledges Adoptee
Identity Rights and immediately shows Adoptees access to their own information on health,
history and heritage in line with the equality and personal autonomy rights of other citizens
and as voted for in two referenda".
15.5 Cllr. M. Whelan:
4' That Wexford County Council review its development fees for Solar farms in the county and
raise them to a level that would reflect the impact on the local community".
15.6 Cllr. J. Hegarty:
"In line with our ongoing efforts to position County Wexford as a healthy county, I call on
Wexford County Council to pass on live information and warnings when required in relation to
the air quality of our main towns to the general public via the Map alert system".
15.7 Cllr. M. Byrne:
"That Wexford County Council condemns the outrageous cost overruns of the planned
National Children's Hospital and calls for those responsible to be held to account.
15.8 Cllr. M. Sheehan:
"That this Council supports our GPs campaign for better terms and conditions with the
undoing of FEMPI legislation and to calls on the Minister for Health to engage with the
stakeholders to ensure that practices remain open, new doctors are recruited to ensure that
practices remain viable and that patients do not have to travel long distances for GP
appointments".
4.
15.9 Cllr. T. Forde:
propose that this Council write separately to RTE, Eurovision Song Contest Ireland and the
Irish performers, calling on all participants not to play any part in the 2019 Eurovision Song
Contest, due to be held in Israel, until Israel recognises equal rights for Palestinians and
observers international law."
15.10 Cllr. D. Hynes:
"That this Council considers in view of the many housing applicants, that the Council is not in
a position to provide a social house for at present, would therefore develop a more direct link
with letting agencies to find out what accommodations are available to rent within the HAP
income guidelines and as far as possible which landlords will accept HAP. As many
applicants are under severe pressure and are often stressed trying to find a suitable place to
15.11 Cllr. M. Sheehan:
"That this Council calls on the Minister for Social protection to abandon the costly piecemeal
practice to reviewing all those affected by the 2012 pension rules changes and to reinstate
the old criteria of the pre-change State pension while developing a mechanism to backdate
the full arrears to those pensioners affected"
15.12 Cllr. F. OSüilleabhåin:
"This Council acknowledges the large number of homeowners in County Wexford who are
currently experiencing mortgage distress. It welcomes the passing of the first stage of the 'No
Consent, No Sale" legislation in Leinster House which prevents banks selling home
mortgages to vulture funds without the consent of the borrower/home-owner. This council is
calling on all T.D.s to facilitate the speedy passage of the bill through the remaining legislative
stages".
15.13 Cllr. D. Hynes:
"That this Council calls on the government to reverse the decision by revenue to impose VAT
at 23% on Food supplements from health stores".
16. Any Other Business
5.