County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 1 of 14 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council Held Monday 9th September 2024 
 in the Council Chamber at 2.30pm (with some remote attendance) 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. Pip Breen, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors: 
 
 
 
Barden 
Pat  
 
Kehoe 
Pat 
O’Rourke 
John 
 
Boland 
Nicky 
 
Kelly 
Leonard 
 
Ó Súilleabháin 
Fionntán 
 
Browne 
Aidan 
 
Kenny 
Donal 
 
Owens 
Jackser 
 
Byrne 
 
Cathal 
Laffan 
Garry 
 
Shannon 
Raymond 
Codd 
Jim 
 
Lawlor  
George 
Sheehan 
Michael 
Donohoe 
Anthony 
 
McDonald 
Darragh 
Staples 
Frank  
 
Dwyer 
John 
McDonald 
Lisa 
 
Staples 
Robbie 
(Online) 
Farrell 
Mary 
 
Murphy 
Barbara-
Anne 
Sullivan 
Joe 
 
Fleming 
John 
Murphy 
Bridín 
 
Walsh 
Catherine 
Biddy 
Forde  
Tom 
Murphy 
Marty 
 
Walsh 
 Oliver 
 
Kavanagh 
Paddy 
O’Brien 
Aoife Rose 
 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. M. Drea, County Secretary 
Ms. C. Godkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. L. Hore, Director of Services 
Mr. S. Howell, A/Director of Services 
Ms. L. Lacey, Head of Finance 
Mr. E. Taaffe, Chief Executive 
 
Apologies: There were no apologies recorded 
 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 2 of 14 
 
 
Votes of sympathy: 
 
The Cathaoirleach offered the sympathy of the Council to: 
  
• The family of David Bolger, husband of Deirdre Bolger, former County Councillor. 
• The family of James (Jimmy) Kavanagh, father of Jimmy Kavanagh, GSS for Rosslare 
Municipal District 
• The family of May (Mary) Savage, mother Nicola Godden, Customer Services Unit 
• The family of Padge Roban, father of Paula Roban, FOI Section 
• The family of Sarah Corish, wife of Dermot Corish, Foreman, New Ross Municipal District 
• The family of Dan Donovan, father of Clinton Donovan, Climate Action Office 
• The family of Maura Roche, mother of Aine Roche, Local Authority Integration Team. 
• The family of Arthur Murphy, former Engineer, Wexford County Council. 
• The family of Ger Doran, Top Tyres, Enniscorthy. 
 
Congratulations: 
 
Cllr. J. Codd congratulated the organisers of the Duncormick Harvest festival. 
Cllr. J. Codd congratulated Boo Murphy who won the U15 girls doubles final at the 
World Handball Wallball Championships. 
Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated the Handball Board on hosting the World Wallball One Wall 
Championship in the University of Limerick Sports Arena in August. 
Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated the Raheen Men’s and Ladies Intermediate Rounders teams on 
winning their respective All Ireland finals. 
Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated Linda Kelly on partnering Katie-George Dunlevy to win gold in the 
women’s B individual time trial cycling event at the Paralympic Games.  
Cllr.’s J. Fleming and M. Sheehan congratulated the Wexford fire fighters and their FDNY 
counterparts who are taking part in a charity cycle in Ireland this week. 
Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated Cllr. N. Boland on completing the 200km Kerry Way Ultra. 
Cllr. P. Barden congratulated Green Road on the release of their new song “They Sailed Away” and 
Eddie Doyle who wrote the song. 
Cllr. C. Walsh congratulated everyone involved with making Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann such a 
massive success. 
Cllr. G. Carthy congratulated the people of Rosslare for continuing to maintain their protest and 
emphasised the need for an answer from An Bord Pleanála. 
Cllr. A. Browne congratulated Rapparees-Starlights GAA club on the opening of McCauley Park 
Bellefield in Enniscorthy. 
Cllr. A. Browne congratulated Festy Ebosele on being called up to the Irish senior squad for the game 
against Greece. 
Cllr.’s A. Browne and L. McDonald congratulated Fiona Kehoe on winning a gold medal at the World 
Masters Championships in Gothenburg, Sweden. 
Cllr. L. McDonald congratulated the St. Martins minor rounders team who won the men’s division 
and the victorious mixed minor team who won their division. 
Cllr. B.A. Murphy congratulated Aoibhe Ormonde, Emma Gaffney, Sarah Murphy, Katie Moran and 
Nykia Quigley from Aspire Gymnastics Academy who have been selected to represent Ireland at the 
Acrobatic Gymnastics World Championships in Portugal on Sunday September 8th. 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 3 of 14 
 
Cllr. M. Sheehan congratulated the organisers of the Kennedy Summer School and Willie Kielthy 
who has stepped down from his role as Chairperson. 
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
County Council Meeting 8th July, 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming the Council 
resolved to confirm the Minutes of the County Council Meeting on 8th July, 2024. 
  
Matters Arising: 
Cllr. J. Fleming noted that he did attend the July Council meeting on 8th July, 2024 but he 
wasn’t recorded as attending in the minutes. 
 
2.  
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001: 
 
2.1 Intention to lease property at Caislean an Dinigh, Carrig on Bannow, Co. Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. A.R. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. G. Carthy the Council resolved to 
lease property at Caislean an Dinigh, Carrig on Bannow, Co. Wexford, in accordance with 
the terms set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
2.2 Intention to transfer a portion of land at Tomsollagh, Ferns, Co. Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. P. Kavanagh the Council resolved to 
transfer a portion of land at Tomsollagh, Ferns, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms 
set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
2.3 Intention to dispose of property known as “Gladney’s” at 5 John Street, New Ross, Co. 
Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming the Council resolved to 
dispose of property known as “Gladney’s” at 5 John Street, New Ross, Co. Wexford, in 
accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
2.4 Intention to dispose of land at Rathnure, Co. Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Fleming, seconded by Cllr. B. Murphy the Council resolved to 
dispose of land at Rathnure, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 
Notice as circulated.  
 
2.5 Intention to lease land at Rathnure, Co. Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. B. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. P. Barden the Council resolved to 
lease land at Rathnure, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 
Notice as circulated.  
 
2.6 Intention to lease land Ballyknockan, Rosslare Harbour, Co. Wexford. 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. A.R. O’Brien the Council resolved to 
lease land at Ballyknockan, Rosslare Harbour, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms 
set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 4 of 14 
 
3.  
Part XI of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 (as amended): 
 
 
Mr. E. Taaffe outlined the broad detail of a discussion with the Members of Enniscorthy 
M.D. stating that the current proposed works will form part of a comprehensive URDF 
application. Mr. Taaffe advised that some additional parking spaces can be provided on the 
Murphy Flood site until such time as that site is being developed. Mr. Taaffe also confirmed 
that there will be investment in the Templeshannon area public realm, and a proposed 
regeneration project in the castle quarter. 
There was a lengthy discussion with contributions from Cllr.’s A. Browne, J. Owens, C. 
Byrne, and P. Kavanagh. 
 
3.1 LAC2312 – Revised street layouts and public realm improvements to Castle Hill, Castle 
Street, Church Street, Court Street, Weafer Street, Spout Lane, Cathedral Street, Main 
Street, Barrack Street and Island Road, Enniscorthy. 
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. A. Browne, 
seconded by Cllr. J. Owens, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for revised street 
layouts and public realm improvements to Castle Hill, Castle Street, Church Street, Court 
Street, Weafer Street, Spout Lane, Cathedral Street, Main Street, Barrack Street and Island 
Road, Enniscorthy, in accordance with the terms of LAC2312, as circulated. 
 
3.2 LAC2404 - Construction of 22 no. housing units, consisting of 8 no. 1-bed single storey 
adaptable units, 8 no. 3-bed two storey terrace units, 6 no. 2-bed two storey terrace units 
and associated site works at Cluain Fada, Morrisseyland, New Ross, Co. Wexford. 
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, 
seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for construction of 
22 no. housing units, consisting of 8 no. 1-bed single storey adaptable units, 8 no. 3-bed 
two storey terrace units, 6 no. 2-bed two storey terrace units and associated site works at 
Cluain Fada, Morrisseyland, New Ross, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms of 
LAC2404, as circulated. 
 
3.3 LAC2405 – St. Waleran’s Proposed Sports Complex to include community sports 
building with indoor courts; outdoor cricket field, athletics track and hockey pitch; access 
arrangements including cycle paths, footpaths, 94 no. parking spaces, temporary access 
roadway, landscaping and ancillary site development works. 
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. J. Sullivan, 
seconded by Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for St. 
Waleran’s Proposed Sports Complex to include community sports building with indoor 
courts; outdoor cricket field, athletics track and hockey pitch; access arrangements 
including cycle paths, footpaths, 94 no. parking spaces, temporary access roadway, 
landscaping and ancillary site development works, in accordance with the terms of 
LAC2405, as circulated. 
 
4. 
Submission on the Arklow Bank Wind Park 2 in Accordance With Section 291(4) of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) as a Coastal Authority 
 
Mr. E. Taaffe outlined that in accordance with Section 291(4) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended) Wexford County Council as a coastal planning 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 5 of 14 
 
authority is a statutory consultee. Mr. E. Taaffe advised that as the period for public 
consultation ended on 12th August, Wexford County Council sought and were granted an 
extension of time from An Bord Pleanála to consult with the Members at the September 
Council meeting.  
 
Mr. E. Taaffe gave the Members a summary of the key points contained in Wexford County 
Council’s submission, which was circulated, and informed the Members that in accordance 
with Section 291(6) & (7), the Members can by resolution attach their own 
recommendation.   
 
There was a lengthy discussion with contributions from Cllr.’s J. Codd, P. Barden, F. Ó 
Súilleabháin, G. Carthy, G. Lawlor, J. Sullivan, and M. Farrell. There was general positivity in 
relation to the need and benefit of renewable energy, whilst real concern was expressed in 
relation to the potential impact on the local fishing industry and those reliant on it for their 
livelihood.  
 
The following motion was proposed by Cllr. Jim Codd, seconded by Cllr. Ger Carthy, and 
agreed by all to be included with Wexford County Council’s submission to An Bord 
Pleanála: 
 
“We call on An Bord Pleanála to establish the full impact of the construction and operation 
of the Arklow Bank Windfarm on the livelihood of our fishing industry and all those who 
benefit from it in the short, medium and long term.” 
 
5. 
Budget 2025 
 
a. Local Property Tax – local adjustment factor 2025 (LAF) 
Ms. L. Lacey advised that the 2022 regulations establish the statutory deadline for 
passing a resolution to set a Local Adjustment Factor as follows: 
- 
In the year in which a revaluation takes place this will be 31st August 
- 
In every other year the deadline will revert to 15th October 
Therefore, for the 2025 decision the deadline is 15th October, 2024 
 
b. Local Property Tax – provisional allocation 2025 
Ms. L. Lacey informed the Members that while we have not received formal 
notification of the 2025 LPT allocation, we are assuming that the allocation for 2025 
will remain the same as 2024 at €15,126,453 (excluding LAF) and including +15% LAF, 
as agreed as part of the Economic & Development programme commitments, at 
€16,985,613.  
 
c. Budget Meetings 2025 – prescribed periods 
Ms. L. Lacey outlined that the prescribed period for the Statutory Budget Meeting is: 
01 November 2024 to 06 December 2024 
 
The prescribed periods that apply for the holding of a meeting of a municipal district to 
consider the draft budgetary plan (GMA) are as follows:  
14 October 2024 to 15 November 2024 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 6 of 14 
 
 
d. Proposed schedule of dates  
Ms. L. Lacey set out the following proposed schedule of dates: 
 
Meeting 
Proposed Date 
Budget Strategy Meeting – Cross Council Group 
Monday 7th October at 2.30pm 
 
Decision on Local Adjustment Factor for LPT  
Council Meeting 14th October 
Draft Budgetary Plan Meeting with Municipal Districts 
October MD Meetings** 
Statutory Budget Meeting 
Monday 25th November at 10.am 
** As NRMD October meeting is outside the statutory period a change of date for the meeting 
will be proposed 
 
Cllr. G. Carthy congratulated Ms. L. Lacey on her appointment as Director of Finance. Cllr. 
Carthy requested an uplift in the General Municipal Allocation which Ms. Lacey said would 
be considered as part of the budgetary process. 
 
6. 
Corporate Plan 2025 - 2029 
 
Ms. A. Byrne informed the Members that work is underway on drafting the Corporate Plan 
which must be adopted by the end of the year. Ms. Byrne advised that there will be a 
consultation process with the Members. 
 
7. 
Appointment to Local Community Safety Partnership (LCSP)  
 
Ms. C. Godkin informed the Members that seven appointments were being sought to the 
Local Community Safety Partnership (LCSP). Mr. M. Drea enquired if any Members 
intended forming a group in accordance with paragraph 18, schedule 10 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 for the purpose of making an appointment, with a minimum of five 
Members required to form a group.  
 
The following Members formed a group – Cllr.’s P. Kavanagh, P. Barden, R. Shannon, M. 
Murphy, and N. Boland. On the proposal of Cllr. P. Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr. M. Murphy, 
Cllr. R. Shannon was appointed to the LCSP. 
 
The following Members formed a group – Cllr.’s T. Forde, F. Ó Súilleabháin, A. R. O’Brien, J. 
Dwyer, and L. Kelly. On the proposal of Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. L. Kelly, Cllr. A.R. 
O’Brien was appointed to the LCSP. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. L. McDonald, J. Sullivan, B.A. 
Murphy, and J. Fleming were appointed to the LCSP. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A. Donohoe, seconded by Cllr. B. Murphy, Cllr.’s O. Walsh and D. 
McDonald were appointed to the LCSP. 
 
Cllr. D. McDonald withdrew his nomination to the LCSP. 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 7 of 14 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. O. Walsh, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, Cllr. G. Carthy was 
appointed to the LCSP. 
 
Those duly appointed to the LCSP were Cllr.’s R. Shannon, A.R. O’Brien, J. Sullivan, B.A. 
Murphy, J. Fleming, O. Walsh, and G. Carthy. 
 
8. 
Appointment to Healthy County Committee (including Mental Wellbeing Working Group) 
 
Ms. C. Godkin informed the Members that four appointments were being sought to the 
Healthy County Committee (including Mental Wellbeing Working Group). Mr. M. Drea 
enquired if any Members intended forming a group in accordance with paragraph 18, 
schedule 10 of the Local Government Act 2001 for the purpose of making an appointment, 
with a minimum of nine Members required to form a group.  
 
The following Members formed a group – Cllr.’s T. Forde, F. Ó Súilleabháin, A. R. O’Brien, J. 
Dwyer, L. Kelly, J. Codd, J. O’Rourke, J. Owens, and G. Lawlor. On the proposal of Cllr. T. 
Forde, seconded by Cllr. J. Dwyer, Cllr. L. Kelly was appointed to the Healthy County 
Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A. Donohoe, seconded by Cllr. O. Walsh, Cllr. B. Murphy was 
appointed to the Healthy County Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny, Cllr.’s G. Carthy and M. 
Sheehan were appointed to the Healthy County Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Byrne, seconded by Cllr. P. Kehoe, Cllr. F. Staples was appointed 
to the Healthy County Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr. P. Barden, Cllr. R. Shannon was 
appointed to the Healthy County Committee. 
 
Cllr.’s G. Carthy and B. Murphy withdrew their nominations leaving Cllr.’s L. Kelly, F. 
Staples, M. Sheehan, and R. Shannon duly appointed. 
 
Cllr. R. Staples left the meeting at this point. 
 
9. 
Approval for Enniscorthy Municipal District delegation to travel to Blacktown, Sydney, 
Australia – March 2025 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Owens, the Members resolved to 
send a delegation from Enniscorthy Municipal District to Blacktown, Sydney, Australia in 
March 2025. 
 
10. 
Approval for delegation to attend KIMO AGM, October 2024 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A. Browne, seconded by Cllr. G. Carthy, the Members resolved to 
send a delegation to attend the KIMO AGM in Harlingen, Netherlands in October 2024. 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 8 of 14 
 
11. 
Invitation to Wexford Towns Reunion Buffet Dinner Dance – London Wexford Association 
– 12th October, 2024 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. R. Shannon, the Members resolved 
to send a delegation to the London Wexford Association Wexford Towns Reunion Buffet 
Dinner Dance in London on 12th October, 2024. 
 
12. 
Chief Executives Report 
 
The Chief Executive and members of the Management Team responded to a wide range of 
queries from the Elected Members regarding the following: 
 
• 
Cllr. J. Owens proposed that a school warden be hired for St. Aidan’s school, and 
this was seconded by Cllr. A. Browne. 
• 
What steps are the Council taking to enhance the Dog Warden service to deal with 
new XL Bully legislation. 
• 
Request that Wexford County Council work with landowners to cut back vegetation 
which is causing a danger on the roads outside of the specified cutting period. 
• 
Request that road markings be reviewed. 
• 
Request for list of estates in Gorey LEA which have applied to be taken in charge 
and the status of the requests. 
• 
Update sought on pyrite/mica cases. 
• 
Michele Bridge Carley and Stephen Sheehan’s assistance in dealing with a difficult 
case was complimented. 
• 
What supports are available for people suffering from domestic violence. 
• 
Is this the end of the road for appeals for Wexford metal recycling plant refused 
planning by An Bord Pleanála? 
 
Cllr. J. Owens left the meeting at this point. 
 
• Mr. E. Taaffe and Cathaoirleach P. Breen congratulated Ms. L. Lacey on her 
appointment as Director of Finance. 
• What are the sanctions if someone cuts down a tree without permission? Who is 
responsible, the Council or the Gardaí? 
• What percentage of affordable houses in Ramsfort will be allocated to local people? 
• Active travel at Crossabeg national school welcomed. 
• Timeline for Forth Mountain Phase 2. 
• Timeline for Curracloe Water Sports Activity facility. 
• Status of funding application for Larkin’s Cross safety works? 
• Are TII proposing some safety works at the Heritage Park? 
• Why are so few properties being advertised on CBL? 
• How much has been overspent on B&B emergency accommodation? Will it be difficult 
to recoup this expenditure? 
• Request that the pilot scheme for Bolt scooters be discussed with the Members. 
 
Cllr.’s O. Walsh, D. Kenny and F. Ó Súilleabháin the meeting at this point. 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 9 of 14 
 
• Request that staff member be appointed to proactively pursue the acquisition of 
development land. 
• How many estates to be taken in charge in Enniscorthy LEA and County? 
• How many waiting on pre-planning meetings? 
• When will there be another pre-planning clinic in the Street in County Hall? 
• Request for update on Fire Service staffing. 
• Update request for Clohamon junction. 
• Request for bypass or relief road on the N80 for Bunclody. 
• Ballycarney junction update. 
• Request that TII be asked to attend the next Council meeting. 
• Request that the number of beds per housing unit allocated be provided in the CE 
Report. 
 
The meeting adjourned for a comfort break at this point. 
 
• Request that the Council seek to develop more than 50 units on the Lyre site. 
• Request that Ballyhogue water issues be raised with Uisce Éireann. 
• Timeline for Killeens master plan. 
• Timeline for schools at Killeens. 
• Council commended for landscaping of Oyster Lane site. 
• Request that the Council consider an ice rink at Oyster Lane for the Christmas period. 
• Request that potholes at Larkin’s Cross be repaired. 
• Request that Cullenstown junction onto Carrig on Bannow road and junction coming to 
Fethard at Poulfur be examined. 
• Request for housing nominee to sit on Drugs Taskforce. 
• Status update on the housing site in Taghmon. 
• Can the Council assist Taghmon and Castlebridge Handball Clubs to resolve ownership 
issues. 
• Council commended for a fantastic Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann. Request that 
consideration be given to the impact on businesses on the outskirts of the town next 
year. 
 
Cllr. C. Byrne left the meeting at this point. 
 
• Is there a programme to deal with junctions particularly badly impacted by heavy 
machinery? 
• Status of SETU campus? 
• Call for Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science to 
make a decision on the roll out of veterinary and pharmacy courses in SETU. 
• Request for a list of all applications for the Community Recognition Fund. 
• Timeline for commencement of Esmonde St. works. 
• Query if Part V units are advertised on CBL system. 
• Disgust expressed at Bus Eireann’s late notification to families that no school bus 
service is available. 
• Request to seek funding for bus shelters from NTA. 
• Update on affordable housing scheme for New Ross. 
• Update on New Ross advance factory. 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 10 of 14 
 
• Status of library project in New Ross? 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy standing orders were 
suspended to allow the meeting to proceed beyond 5.30pm. 
 
• Request that park and ride be explored for other events in Wexford after its success at 
the Fleadh. 
• Request that action be taken against a tenant who was evicted for serious anti-social 
behaviour but has now moved into another local authority property. 
• Request for short and long term plans for old Tesco site in Wexford. 
• Request that the Council consider solar panels for new build units to reduce the cost of 
heating water. 
 
Cllr. L. Kelly left the meeting at this point. 
 
• Commend the Council for their work in delivering housing units in Gorey. 
• Issue of beach being washed away in Courtown was raised and request that handrail 
be replaced at the beach. 
 
13. 
Minutes of CPG 
 
13.1 
Minutes of CPG Meeting 2nd September, 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming the Council resolved to 
confirm the Minutes of CPG Meeting 2nd September, 2024. 
 
14. 
Minutes of Meetings (for Noting): 
 
14.1 New Ross Municipal District Meeting – 8th May, 2024 
14.2 New Ross Municipal District Annual Meeting – 26th June, 2024 
14.3 Rosslare Municipal District Meeting – 15th May, 2024 
14.4 Rosslare Municipal District Annual Meeting 26th June 2024 
14.5 Borough District of Wexford Meeting – 20th May, 2024 
14.6 Borough District of Wexford Annual Meeting – 25th June, 2024 
14.7 Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting – 20th May, 2024 
14.8 Enniscorthy Municipal District Annual Meeting 26th June, 2024 
14.9 Gorey-Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting – 21st May, 2024 
14.10 Gorey-Kilmuckridge Municipal District Annual Meeting – 25th June, 2024 
14.11 Protocol Committee Meeting 8th January, 2024 
 
 The Members noted the minutes, as circulated. 
 
15. 
Councillor's Conferences and Training 
 
15.1 List of Conferences /Training - List Attached 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, the Council resolved to 
approve the following training courses and conferences. 
 
Training: 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 11 of 14 
 
 
11/12 
AILG Autumn Training Seminar 2024 – Hillgrove Hotel, Monaghan. 
September 
Fee €170 
 
26 September AILG Training – “An Overview of the Planning System” – Horse & Jockey, 
Tipperary. 
 
(Southern Region) 
 
28 September AILG Training – “An Overview of the Planning System” – Bridge House Hotel, 
Tullamore. 
 
(Out of Region) 
 
24 October 
AILG Training – “Local Authority Finance & Budget” – Sligo Park Hotel, Sligo. 
 
(Southern Region) 
 
2 November AILG Training – “Local Authority Finance & Budget” – Radisson Hotel, 
Limerick. 
 
(Out of Region) 
 
14 November AILG Training – “Government Legislation Policy Programme 2024 – A 
Briefing for Elected 
 
Members” – Tower Hotel, Waterford. (Southern Region) 
 
16 November AILG Training – “Government Legislation Policy Programme 2024 – A 
Briefing for Elected 
 
Members” – Claregalway Hotel, Galway. (Out of Region) 
 
Conferences: 
 
5 September Threshold – Changing Our Housing System, The Richmond Education and 
Event Centre, 
 
Smithfield, Dublin. 
 
11/12/13 
Celtic Conferences – “A Practical Guide to Budget 2025” – Carlingford, Co. 
Louth 
October 
Conference Fee €130 
 
15.2 Councillors Conference Report 
• 
Report from Moncountant France, Twinning Trip - July 2024 
 
The Members noted the report from the Moncountant twinning trip. 
 
16. 
Notices of Motion 
 
16.1 Cllr. Tom Forde 
"We ask that this council fly the Palestinian flag at Wexford County Council on the 
International Day of Solidarity with Palestine on 29th November." 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 12 of 14 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. G. Lawlor, the motion was carried. 
 
16.2 Cllr. Aoife Rose O’Brien 
“This council recognises the critical role of the school transport scheme in the lives of 
families and children and calls for immediate and comprehensive reform to provide a fit-
for-purpose school transport scheme for all students requiring transport to their nearest 
school, irrespective of distance. 
We ask that the Minister for Education and the Minister for Transport; 
- ensure that families issued with concessionary tickets in the past continue to benefit from 
the service. 
- ensure that the school transport scheme is reformed to serve the needs of students and 
their families adequately. 
- ensure that adequate funding is allocated in the 2025 Budget to significantly expand 
school transport services so that it is a dependable service for students.” 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A.R. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. P. Breen, the motion was carried. 
 
16.3 Cllr. John Fleming 
“That Wexford County Council calls on the Minister of State at the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage with special responsibility for Local Government and 
Planning to change the regulation regarding a planning application site notice. 
When a site is inspected and the site notice is not visible the applicant has to re-apply and 
go through the whole costly planning process again. 
I am calling on the Minister to change the regulation to when the County Council inspect 
the site and find there is no planning documentation displayed they give a two week notice 
to the applicant to get the planning notice erected for inspection after that two week 
period.” 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Fleming, seconded by Cllr. G. Laffan, the motion was carried. 
 
16.4 Cllr. Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin 
“Wexford County Council acknowledges the increased costs of construction-related work 
over recent times,and calls on the Department for Social Protection or other relevant 
agency to increase the Housing Adaptation Grants cap from 30K to 35K. as well as 
increasing the HOP and Mobility Aids Grant to take account of extra costs.” 
 
This motion wasn’t moved as Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin was not present. 
 
16.5 Cllr. Bridin Murphy 
"That this Council would host a reception for all of the volunteers and organisers of Fleadh 
Cheoil 2024, thanking them in recognition of how Wexford has benefited from hosting this 
prestigious event". 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. P. Breen, the motion was carried. 
 
16.6 Cllr. Tom Forde 
"Wexford County Council recognises the need for many households to move away from 
heating systems that have a complete reliance on a fire fuelled by coal and other fossil 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 13 of 14 
 
fuels and also recognises that it can be difficult for many older people and those with 
specific medical issues to transport and use coal and other fuels. Currently, households 
cannot avail of the 'Housing Aid for Older People Grant' to upgrade their existing heating 
system from one which relies on the use of a back boiler system. We ask that the Minister 
update the criteria for these grants, to allow households to qualify, if their existing heating 
system relies on a fossil fuelled open fire so that they may upgrade their existing heating 
system." 
 
Cllr. G. Laffan proposed the following amendment: 
 
"Wexford County Council recognises the need for many households to move away from 
heating systems that have a complete reliance on a fire fuelled by coal and other fossil 
fuels and also recognises that it can be difficult for many older people and those with 
specific medical issues to transport and use coal and other fuels. Currently, households 
cannot avail of the 'Housing Aid for Older People Grant' to upgrade their existing heating 
system from one which relies on the use of a back boiler system. We ask that the Minister 
update the criteria for these grants, to allow households to qualify, if their existing heating 
system relies on a fossil fuelled open fire so that they may upgrade their existing heating 
system to include oil or gas fired burners." 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. G. Laffan the amended motioned was 
carried. 
 
16.7 Cllr. Aoife Rose O’Brien 
“This council recognises the critical role of mental health services and their accessibility 
and calls on the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health patients, for 
dedicated beds for patients experiencing crisis mental health to be allocated in Wexford 
that provide adequate, 24/7 care. “ 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A.R. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. T. Forde the motion was carried. 
 
16.8 Cllr. Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin 
“This council heartily commends all who contributed to the huge success of Fleadh Cheoil 
na hÉireann 2024. It notes the profits made by vintners and will engage with the Vintners 
Association to establish a Community Benefits Fund to assist a local mental health charity 
or other worthy local cause for Fleadh Cheoil 2025.” 
 
This motion wasn’t moved as Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin was not present. 
 
17. 
Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. T. Forde sought an update in relation to a motion which was submitted to the Minister 
in relation to funding for Talk to Tom. 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 09.09.24 
 
Page 14 of 14 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Samhain, 2024. 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr. Pip Breen  
 
 
 
 
Michael Drea,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
 
