County Council Meeting 11.10.21 
 
 
Page 1 of 5 
 
  WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
Held Monday 11 October 2021 at 2.30pm 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. B. A. Murphy Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors: 
 
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD 
LISA 
BELL 
MAURA 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
 
 
 
 
FORDE 
TOM 
O’ROURKE 
JOHN 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
O'SUILLEABHAIN 
FIONNTAIN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
HYNES 
DAVID 
 
 
CARTHY 
GER 
KAVANAGH 
WILLIE 
SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD 
 
 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
SULLIVAN 
JOE 
CONNCIK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
 
 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive 
Mr. T. Larkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Ms. C. Godkin, A/Director of Services 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
Oireachtas: 
Ms. V. Murphy, T.D. 
 
 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs:  P. Breen, D. Devereux, B. Murphy, J. Owens, F. Staples. 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.10.21 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy:  
 
The Council expressed sympathy to the families of the following recently deceased: 
 
• The family of Mr. Richard (Cruise) O’Brien, husband of Margaret O’Brien, Planning 
Department 
• The family of Mr. James V Whelan, father of James Whelan, Water Services 
• The family of Mrs. Helen Wickham, mother of Jimmy Wickham, Community Warden 
• The family of Ms. Tish Codd, Rathfardon Clonroche  
• The family of Mick Delahunty, Killegney Clonroche 
 
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
1.1 
Special Planning Meeting – 6th September, 2021 – 2.30 pm 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Hegarty, seconded by Cllr. M. Bell and agreed by all 
 
Cllr. J. Hegarty asked that the Minutes be amended to reflect that he proposed 
Motion 2.14  
 
1.2  
Special Planning Meeting – 6th September, 2021 – 5.15 pm 
 
Proposed by Cllr. G. Laffan, seconded by Cllr. G. Lawlor. 
 
Mr. T. Larkin DoS sought clarification of the resolution adopted by the Members in 
respect of 2.11 (Hegarty) 2.17 (Bolger) and 3.2 (Barden).   
 
It was agreed that the following resolution appropriately reflected the decision of the 
Members and that the Minutes be amended accordingly: 
 
Provision for Lower Densities in limited cases: 
To facilitate a choice of housing types within areas, limited provision may be made 
for lower density schemes  of a minimum of 20 units per hectare, provided that 
within a neighbourhood or district as a whole average, densities achieve the 
densities mentioned above. 
 
1.3 
County Council Meeting – 13th September, 2021 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. W. Kavanagh and agreed by all 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.10.21 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
2.  
Approval in accordance with Section 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001 (as amended): 
Borrowing – Overdraft 2022 
 
The Members considered the Report of the Head of Finance, and in accordance with Section 
106 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) and on the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, 
seconded by Cllr. K. Codd Nolan, unanimously approved borrowing by way of temporary 
overdraft of €20 Million to 31 December 2022. 
 
3.  
Appointments to the Local Community Development Committee in accordance with 
Section 128 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) 
- Replacement of persons representing public authorities (Health Service Executive and 
Department of Social Protection) 
 
The Members noted the Report of Ms. Carolyne Godkin, A/DoS which recommended the 
Members approval to the appointment of Ms. Derval Howley (representing the HSE) and Mr. 
Brendan Lawton (representing the Dept. of Social Protection) to the Local Community 
Development Committee. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. M. Bell and agreed by all the Council 
approved the nominations as recommended 
 
   4.  
CCTV – Approval of Wexford County Council in accordance with Section 38 of the Garda 
Síochána Act 2005 in respect of the following Community CCTV schemes: 
 
• 
Bunclody – following transfer of ownership of existing community CCTV scheme to 
Wexford County Council 
• 
Wexford – additional cameras 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared a beneficial interest in this agenda item in accordance with 
Section 177 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) and temporarily withdrew from 
the meeting at this point and took no part in the subsequent discussion. 
 
Cllr. A. Connick, Leas Cathaoirleach, took the Chair. 
 
It was agreed to defer consideration of CCTV proposals in respect of Bunclody to allow these 
proposals to be brought before the Members of the Enniscorthy Municipal District for 
further consideration. 
 
The Members noted the Report of the County Secretary in respect of Wexford Community 
CCTV Scheme. On the proposal of Cllr. M. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. M. Sheehan, the 
Members approved the proposal to expand Wexford Community CCTV Scheme and 
approved the making of the associated application to An Garda Siochana for approval in 
accordance with Section 38 of the Garda Síochána Act 2005. 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.10.21 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 
 
Following the conclusion of the discussion on this agenda item, the Cathaoirleach returned 
to the meeting and resumed the Chair. 
 
5.  
Chief Executive's Report  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive and Members of the Management Team responded to a range 
of queries from the elected members, including the following: 
 
o South East Technological University – securing of site 
o IW connections to new housing estates - delays 
o Outdoor Dining Scheme – possibility of extending into 2022 
o Wexford to Rosslare Greenway - timelines 
o Vacant Homes Initiative – staff resources 
o Rosslare Port – Planned developments 
o Choice-based letting – when to be introduced 
o Traveller accommodation – update re facilities at Park, Wexford 
o Energy retrofitting of local authority houses 
o Oilgate to Rosslare Harbour Road Scheme  
o Members Portal 
o Enniscorthy Sports Hub – need to progress Pavilion 
o R730 – gritting requirement 
o St Waleran’s Gorey – progression of Part 8 
o Wastewater capacity at Adamstown village 
o Water Contamination incident in Gorey: 
 
Mr. Eamonn Hore provided a detailed report on this incident to the Council 
which outlined the nature of the incident, including dates, contamination 
details, status of the Council’s investigation into the matter, contact with Irish 
Water and EPA etc. 
 
o Electricity outages in Rathangan area 
o Alleged noise nuisance in Kilrane 
o Streetscape Enhancement Scheme – possibility to extend deadline for works 
completion 
 
The Council having sat for 1hr 55 minutes, and in view of Covid Standard Operating Guidance 
which recommends meetings of the local authority are limited to 1hr and 55 minutes, the 
Cathaoirleach declared her intention to close the meeting and to defer remaining agenda items to 
the next meeting of the Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.10.21 
 
 
Page 5 of 5 
 
6. 
Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. W. Kavanagh drew the attention of the Members to an article published on the 
website of South East Radio. Cllr. Kavanagh questioned the appropriateness of the 
publication by South East Radio, as it appeared to favour one local politician above any 
other.  
 
Following a brief discussion, it was agreed that the Council would refer the matter to the 
Broadcasting Association of Ireland for consideration, and to revisit the matter on receipt 
of a response. 
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING 
 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Samhain, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr Barbara-Anne Murphy 
 
 
 
David Minogue,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
 
