County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
1
   
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
held on Monday 27 July, 2020 – 9.30 a.m.  
in the Riverside Park Hotel, Enniscorthy. 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. G. Carthy, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors:  
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD 
LISA 
BELL 
MAURA 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
BREEN 
PIP 
FORDE 
TOM 
MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
O'ROURKE 
JOHN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
HYNES 
DAVID 
O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
KAVANAGH WILLIE 
OWENS 
JACKSER 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD 
 
 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
 
 
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Larkin, Dep. Chief Executive / Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
Apologies:  
Councillors:  
Frank Staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joe Sullivan 
 
 
 
 
Officials: 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms. C.  Godkin, A/Director of Services 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
2
Expressions of Sympathy / Congratulations 
 
The Members extended sympathy to the families of the following recently  deceased: 
 
 Mr. Tom Godkin 
 Mr. Des Whelan 
 Mr. Tom Forde 
 Mr. Jack Charlton 
 Ms. Deirdre Redmond 
 Mr. Brian Murphy 
 Mr. Myles Dunne 
 Mr. James Connolly 
 Mr. Liam Donegan 
 
Dean na Comharleoirí comhghairdeas ar na ndhaoine as seo a leannas: 
 
 Ms. Gaye Murphy and all those involved in organizing the recent and 
highly  successful Relay for Life, Wexford. 
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
 
2.1  
County Council Meeting – 29 June, 2020 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne and agreed. 
 
 
2.2 
Annual Meeting of Wexford County Council 29 June, 2020 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne and agreed. 
 
 
2.3 
Matters Arising 
 
 
 
In response to members queries, the Deputy CE advised that negotiations 
 
 
between Wexford County Council and Carlow IT in relation to the   
 
 
development of a Wexford Campus were progressing very well.  
 
 
 
The Deputy CE advised that he proposed to invite representatives from  
 
 
Carlow IT to attend the October meeting of Wexford County Council to  
 
 
outline their plans for the development of the Wexford Campus. This was  
 
 
agreed. 
 
2.  
Proposal under Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
 
2.1  
Proposed long-term lease of lands at Enniscorthy Technology Park  
 
 
 
Statutory Notice having been served, and on the proposal of Councillor B.A. 
 
 
Murphy, seconded by Cllr. O’Rourke, the Members resolved to dispose of  
 
 
the lands in accordance with the Notice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
3
 
3. 
Part XI of the Local Government Planning & Development Act 2000 (as 
 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as 
 
amended)  
 
 
3.1 
LAC2001 Proposed development – Alterations to the Ballast Office to  
 
 
facilitate a change of use from office to shop/restaurant. The Ballast Building 
 
 
is a protected structure (RPS No. WBC0120) at Ballast Office, Crescent  
 
 
Quay, Wexford. 
 
 
 
The Members agreed to defer consideration of the Manager’s Report to a  
 
 
later date and asked that in the interim, the proposal be reviewed at a  
 
 
meeting of the Members of the Borough District of Wexford  
 
 
4. 
Notice under Section 106 of the Local Government Act 2001 - Borrowing 
 
Approval 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance dated 20  
July 2020 and on the proposal of Cllr. Sheehan seconded by Cllr. Breen, the  
Members resolved to approve an increase of €8 million in borrowings for the 
Economic & Community Development Programme in in accordance with S.106 of 
the Local Government Act 2001.  Council approval of borrowing for this programme 
is now €48m 
 
 
Details of national proposals to amend the Rates Waiver Scheme and the ReStart 
 
Grant Scheme were outlined by the Head of Finance and broadly welcomed by the 
 
Members.  
 
 
Ms. O Neill reminded the Members that the Council will require to be put in funds  by 
 
Government in order to make the payments under the Restart Grant Scheme. 
 
 
5. 
Audit Committee Reports 
 
 
5.1 
Audit Committee commentary on the contents of the 2018 Accounts  
 
 
and audit findings (as previously circulated) 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. O’Rourke, seconded by Cllr. W. Kavanagh, the  
 
 
Members noted the Report in accordance with Section 60 of the Local  
 
 
Government Reform Act 2014. 
 
 
5.2 
Overview of Audit Committee work programme completed during 2019 
 
 
(as previously circulated) 
 
 
 
The Members considered the Report in accordance with section 15 of the  
 
 
Local  Government (Audit Committee) Regulations 2014  
 
 
5.3 
Audit Committee’s proposed work programme for 2020 (as previously 
 
 
circulated) 
 
 
 
The Members noted the Report 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
4
 
6. 
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019-2024 – Progress Report 
 
 
The Members agreed to defer this item to the next monthly meeting of the Council, 
 
due to the absence of the A/Director of Services, Ms. Carolyne Godkin 
 
7. 
Chief Executive’s Report 
 
 
Deputy C.E. Mr. Tony Larkin presented the Report and together with the members 
 
of the  Management Team responded to a range of queries from the Members, 
 
including the  following: 
 
7.1 
Advance Factory New Ross – complex contract – to issue ASAP 
7.2 
Fire-damaged houses in Ballycullane – both to be completed 
7.3 
Evidence of Increased littering -  
7.4 
Appointment of Heritage Officer - welcomed 
7.5 
Septic Grant Improvement Grant – increase in grant amount recommended 
7.6 
Perceived changes to Housing allocation practices / policies  
7.7 
Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme - implications for mortgage applicants 
7.8 
GDPR issues regarding littering - clarified 
7.9 
Promotion of tourism in South Wexford – further plans in place 
7.10 Housing Development in Wexford –method statement submitted 
7.11 Invitation to Housing Minister to attend Council meeting - agreed 
7.12 Road Repairs in South Wexford - noted 
7.13 Carrigfoyle Activity Centre –negotiations continue with WWETB 
7.14 Bunclody Swimming Pool – Council funding appreciated 
7.15 Road Improvements on former N11 at Ferns – will be completed 
7.16 Enniscorthy Flood Defence Scheme – Scheme approval awaited 
7.17 Building Control practices – to be reviewed on case by case basis 
7.18 Harbour Byelaws – under public consultation 
7.19 Indiscriminate parking in coastal areas – to be reviewed 
7.20 Local Improvement Schemes – GDPR issues to be clarified 
7.21 Public water supply in Coolballow area – matter for IW 
7.22 Proposed new bridge in Enniscorthy – assessment process continues 
7.23 Help to Buy Scheme – possible use of funds as deposit to be considered 
7.24 Oilgate to Rosslare Scheme – deadline extended to 10 August 
7.25 Pontoon on River Slaney for Search and Rescue use – to be considered 
7.26 New Ross Port – Improvements contract to issue – NRMD to be updated 
7.27 Ireland’s Ancient East – Council supporting marketing campaigns 
7.28 Courtown Parking in Public Places Byelaws – to proceed 
7.29 Camper Van parking – options to be explored at District level 
7.30 New Ross Greenway – Public to be updated on proposed access routes 
 
 
8. 
Corporate Policy Group 
 
  
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell, seconded by Cllr. Breen, the Report of the CPG 
  
meeting of 17 July 2020 was noted by the Members 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
5
9.  
Minutes of Meetings 
 
  
9.1  
Borough District of Wexford Meeting 15.06.2020 & AGM 29.06.2020 
 
  
9.2  
Rosslare Municipal District Meeting 15.06.2020 & AGM 29.06.2020 
 
  
9.3  
Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting 16.06.2020 & AGM   
  
 
29.06.2020 
 
  
9.4  
New Ross Municipal District Meeting 11.06.2020 & AGM 29.06.2020 
 
  
9.5  
Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting 15th June, 2020 & AGM 29.06.2020
  
  
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. Fleming, the Members noted 
  
the Minutes of the above meetings 
 
 
10. 
Sealing of Documents 
 
  
Noted 
 
 
11. 
 Correspondence and Communications 
 
 
11.1  Letter from Mr. John Kelpie, Chief Executive, Derry City & Strabane  
 
 
District Council dated 10th July, 2020. 
 
 
 
Noted 
 
 
11.2 Letter of Invitation to Irish Water to attend Sept Meeting of the Council 
 
 
 
Noted 
 
 
12.  
Notices of Motion 
 
 
12.1 “Recognising the contribution of CE Supervisors for their years of dedication 
 
 
to their communities and the findings of the Labour Court rulings, this Council 
 
 
calls on the Government to engage, consult and honour the commitment of a 
 
 
fair gratuity scheme and resolve the pension entitlements for all the  
 
 
Supervisors and Assistants who are have put in the years of service and  
 
 
deserve their due recognition” 
 
 
 
Before discussion commenced on this Motion, Cllr. B.A. Murphy  
 
 
 
declared a beneficial interest in the matter. Cllr. Murphy then temporarily  
 
 
withdrew from the meeting In accordance with S. 177 of the Local   
 
 
Government Act 2001 and remained absent for so long as the matter was  
 
 
under  discussion. 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. A. Bolger and agreed 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
6
 
 
Following the above discussion and resolution, Cllr. B.A. Murphy  
 
 
 
rejoined the meeting.  
 
 
 
 
12.2    “Wexford County Council calls on the Irish Government Departments of  
 
 
Health, Justice and Equality and Children and Youth Affairs to recognize that 
 
 
Parental Alienation is “Substantial and sustained dissatisfaction within a  
 
 
caregiver-child relationship associated with significant disturbance in  
 
 
functioning” as coded by the World Health Organisation in the latest  
 
 
International Classification of Diseases version 11 and to implement  
 
 
recommendation 36 of the Report of the Reform of the Family Law System 
 
 
October 2019.” 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. L. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin and agreed 
 
 
12.3  “Asking this council for the roll-out of a QR style code on every public bin in 
 
 
Co. Wexford.  
 
 
 
This would allow people to report overflowing bins as well as illegal dumping 
 
 
in real time using their phone and thus ensure a quick and targeted  
 
 
response. The issue has become much more prominent over the lockdown 
 
 
period with people spending a lot more time outdoors. The Summer months 
 
 
and periods of good weather further exacerbate the problem. Despite the  
 
 
best efforts of the Council, overflowing bins are becoming a common feature 
 
 
near parks and playgrounds across the county. 
 
 
 
If a bin is damaged or overflowing anyone with a smartphone can snap a  
 
 
picture of the QR code and report it to Wexford co Council. This generates a 
 
 
service request and the Council can then send someone to attend the issue 
 
 
asap. 
 
 
 
It takes less than a minute to report and it means the Council can target  
 
 
problem areas rather than trying to cover everywhere all the time. It will also 
 
 
act as a deterrent to those illegally dumping household waste near public  
 
 
bins as they know the Council will be watching the areas where it is most  
 
 
prominent.” 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. A. Browne, seconded by Cllr. G. Laffan and agreed 
 
 
12.4  “We call on the Minister for Health to confirm that Ireland has already  
 
 
put in a bulk order for syringes in anticipation of a vaccine for the  
 
 
 
Covid 19 virus, similar to bulk orders that have already been placed by  
 
 
USA, Canada and other countries. 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. John Hegarty.  Cllr. Hegarty then amended the Motion to 
 
 
include the following sentence. 
 
 
 
In addition, we ask the Minister to immediately engage with vaccine  
 
 
providers to ensure  that Ireland is included in any rollout of vaccine  
 
 
at the earliest possible opportunity. 
  
 
 
The Motion as amended was seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell and agreed. 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
7
 
 
 
12.5  Cllr. M. Sheehan 
 
 
 
“That this Council agrees to organise a cross-party group and seeks a  
 
 
deputation with the Minister for Local Government, Darragh O’Brien TD  
 
 
to outline our priorities and capital investment programme for County  
 
 
Wexford for his support and endorsement.” 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. J. Codd and agreed 
 
 
 
12.6  Cllr. L. Kelly 
 
 
 
“Wexford County Council Request that the new minister for education  
 
 
and skills immediately formulate a plan of action to directly address the  
 
 
growing educational inequality occurring in Wexford, and throughout  
 
 
the County resulting from the increased need for remote schooling.  
 
 
 
 
Families of children who do not have access to sufficient broadband or  
 
 
who do not have the finances to purchase laptops or tablet are now at an  
 
 
immediate disadvantage educationally, especially with the potential  
 
 
for second waves of COVID-19 pandemic causing further disruption to in- 
 
 
class teaching” 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. L. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes and agreed 
 
 
13. 
Any Other Business   
 
 
13.1 Disability Inclusion Strategy for Services. 
 
 
 
The Members noted circulation of the above Council publication. They  
 
 
offered a range of comments, including more transport services for those  
 
 
living with a disability in rural areas, the trimming of hedges in urban areas to 
 
 
facilitate footpath use, the marking of all disability spaces in blue, dishing of 
 
 
footpaths to facilitate wheelchair access, provision of additional bus  
 
 
shelters in rural areas. 
 
 
13.2 Protocol Committee 
 
 
 
A meeting of the Protocol Committee is to be convened 
 
 
13.3 Additional Schools 
 
 
 
The Members congratulated Cllr. B.A. Murphy for her work as Chairperson of 
 
 
the WWETB in securing an agreement for the construction of an additional 
 
 
secondary school in Wexford 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 27.07.20 
 
 
8
 
 
 
13.4 Covid 19 – Travel abroad 
 
 
 
The Members expressed disappointment that members of the public are  
 
 
experiencing difficulty in receiving refund of travel costs for cancellation of  
 
 
proposed holidays following public health  
 
 
 
 
This concluded the Business of the Meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an         lá de  Méan Fomhair, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
County Secretary 
 
 
 
 
