County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 1 of 7 
 
  WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
Held Monday 11 January, 2021 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. Ger Carthy, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors: 
 
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BELL 
MAURA 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FORDE 
TOM 
MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
BREEN 
PIP 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
 
 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HYNES 
DAVID 
O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
KAVANAGH 
WILLIE 
OWENS 
JACKSER 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
STAPLES 
 FRANK 
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
SULLIVAN 
JOE 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD LISA 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive  
Mr. T. Larkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Ms. C. Godkin, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
Apologies: 
Cllr. J. O’Rourke 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy:  
 
The Council expressed sympathy to the families of the following recently deceased: 
 
o Mrs. Nell Aspell, Terrarath 
o The Katus, Byrne and Murphy Families, New Ross 
o Mr. Seamus Swan, Fishers Row, Wexford 
o Mrs. Mary Doyle, Ballyhogue 
o Mr. Jimmy O’Neill, Ballyhogue 
o The Very Reverend Noel Canon Hartley, Kilmuckridge and New Ross 
o Mr. Barry O’Rourke, Enniscorthy 
o Mr.Michael Jordan, Boolavogue 
o Mr. Michael Devereux, Lr. Bride St, Wexford 
o Mrs. Maire O’Shea, New Ross 
o Mr. Stephen Flood, Maudlintown, Wexford 
o Sr. Anne Harpur, Blackwater and Duncormick 
o Ms. Anne (Nan) Fanning, Coolgreaney, Gorey 
o Mr. Liam Fanning, Ballytegan Road, Gorey  
 
 
Votes of Congratulations 
 
The Council congratulated the following: 
 
o Mr. James Kehoe, from the Boley Tug-of-War Club, on being nominated as “one of 
the  
greatest athletes of all time” 
o Wexford Members of the Oireachtas for their efforts in helping to secure 
improvements to  
services at Rosslare Europort 
o Jockey Jonathan Moore, Adamstown, following his recent Grade 1 success 
o Mr. Will Doyle, following his appointment at FAI High Performance Regional Officer 
o Mr. Festy Ebosele, former Moyne Rangers soccer player, following his debut for 
Derby County 
o All villages in County Wexford who were recently awarded funding in the 2020/21 
Town Renewal Scheme 
o The Wexford Families taking part in Ireland’s Fittest Family competition 
o Mrs. Maggie Sullivan, mother of Cllr. Joe Sullivan, on the occasion of her 100th 
Birthday 
o The many support groups throughout County Wexford who are continuing to offer 
services despite the difficulties presented by the Covid-19 pandemic 
o Ms. Madison Roche, Winner, Wexfactor Contest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
1.  
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
 
1.1. 
County Council Meeting – 14 December, 2020 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Breen, seconded by Cllr. J. Moore and agreed   
 
 
unanimously the Council resolved to adopt the above Minutes. 
 
 
Matters Arising: 
 
Amendments: 
Cllr. Kathleen Codd-Nolan asked that Item 13.4 of the 
Minutes be amended to reflect that she had voted for the 
amended proposal. 
 
 
 
Standing Orders 
It was agreed that existing arrangements as set out in  
 
 
 
 
 
Standing Orders for the holding of remote or partially remote 
 
 
 
 
 
meetings of the Council will continue to apply until 30 June 
 
 
 
 
 
2021 and will be reviewed by the elected members after that 
 
 
 
 
 
date.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The decision to hold further meetings of the Council remotely 
 
 
 
 
 
will be  guided by the level of Covid-19 restriction in place at 
 
 
 
 
 
the time of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the meantime, the Protocol Committee together with  
 
 
 
 
 
those Councillors who represent the Council on LAMA and  
 
 
 
 
 
AILG will develop draft Standing Orders to further regulate 
 
 
 
 
 
remote / partially remote meetings of the Council 
 
 
 
Budget 2021  
A/DoS Ms. Carolyne Godkin responded to Cllr. Sheehan  
 
 
 
 
 
regarding funding by Wexford County Council to Ozanam  
 
 
 
 
 
House 
 
 
 
Covid-19 
 
Chief Executive Tom Enright addressed the members and  
 
 
 
 
 
highlighted the efforts of the Council to support the fight  
 
 
 
 
 
against Covid-19. The  Chief Executive also advised that the 
 
 
 
 
 
Council would be happy to assist the HSE in the identification 
 
 
 
 
 
of venues suited to the rollout  of the Covid 19 vaccination  
 
 
 
 
 
programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In response to a query from Cllr. Owens, Mr. Enright advised 
 
 
 
 
 
that a suitable premises was available as a Covid 19 test  
 
 
 
 
 
center in Enniscorthy, but as the HSE is satisfied that current 
 
 
 
 
 
test demand can be managed using the Wexford test center, 
 
 
 
 
 
the HSE has therefore not sought use of an Enniscorthy  
 
 
 
 
 
facility. 
 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was agreed that the expanded CPG Covid-19 Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
would  meet to allow the Members to be updated regarding 
 
 
 
 
 
the on-going Covid -19 situation 
 
 
 
Legal Fees 
 
Cllr. J. Fleming sought information regarding cost of  
 
 
 
 
 
conveyancing as currently charged by the Council’s legal  
 
 
 
 
 
advisors. The A/DoS Housing  agreed to revert to the  
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor on this matter. 
 
 
2.  
Proposed disposal of land under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001: 
 
 
2.1  
Proposed disposal of land at St. Ibar’s Villas, Ballyboggan Lower, Castlebridge, Co. 
 
 
Wexford 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor seconded by Cllr. J. Hegarty the Council  resolved 
 
 
that the proposed disposal should be carried out in accordance with the Notice  
 
 
as circulated. 
 
3.  
Proposed intention to lease land under Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001: 
 
 
3.1  
Proposed intention to lease land at Baile Eoghan, Gorey, Co. Wexford. 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Sullivan seconded by Cllr. P. Breen the Council resolved 
 
 
that the proposed lease should be carried out in accordance with the Notice as  
 
 
circulated. 
 
4. 
Audit Committee Reports 
 
 
4.1 
Audit Committee commentary on the contents of the 2019 Accounts and audit  
 
 
findings in accordance with the Local Government Act 2001 as amended 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, the Members  
 
 
noted the report and commentary of the Committee. 
4.2 
Overview of Audit Committee work programme completed during 2020 in 
 
accordance with section 15 of the Local Government (Audit Committee) 
 
Regulations 2014 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, the Members  
 
 
noted the details of the completed work programme as circulated 
4.3 
Audit Committee’s proposed work programme for 2021 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, the Members  
 
 
noted and approved the proposed work programme as circulated. 
 
 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
5.  
Return of Annual Declaration - Public Register of Interests (Ethics Register) 
 
 
The County Secretary advised the Members of the imposed on each member under 
 
section 171 of the Act to prepare and furnish an annual declaration to the Ethics Registrar 
 
(County Secretary). He advised the necessary paperwork would be emailed to each 
 
member in the coming days. 
 
 
6.  
Chief Executive’s Report 
 
 
The Chief Executive presented the Report and together with the members of the 
 
Management Team responded to a range of queries from the Members,  including 
the 
 
following: 
 
 Rosslare Harbour Access Road 
 Winter Maintenance (Gritting/ Salting) Programme 
 Proposals for upgrade of Old Dublin Road, Enniscorthy 
 Oilgate to Rosslare Road Improvement Scheme 
 Improvements to New Ross Courthouse 
 Enforcement of Parking Charges 
 Litter Management / Spring Clean Initiative 
 Templeshannon Enhancement Capital Scheme 
 Gorey Town Park Capital Scheme 
 Housing Adaption Works 
 Skatepark at Min Ryan Park 
 Provision of Covid Test Centre in Enniscorthy 
 Provision of broadband in rural areas 
 Town & Village Scheme 2021 
 Courtown Leisure Centre 
 Gorey Market House 
 
 
7.  
List of Councillors' Conferences and Training 
 
 
7.1 
15/22/29 January Effective Social Media (Lunchtime) Series: 15, 22 & 29 January  
 
 
2021 (LGIU) £168 
 
 
 
The Members noted the above course and on the proposal of Cllr Lawlor, seconded 
 
 
by Cllr. Breen approved it for attendance. 
 
 
8. 
Protocol Meeting Date 
 
 
It was suggested that a meeting of the Protocol Committee would take place on the same 
 
day as the next meeting of the Council i.e. Monday 8 February 2021 – County Secretary to 
 
arrange with the Cathaoirleach and confirm. 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
9.  
Minutes of Meetings (For Noting) 
 
 
9.1  
New Ross Municipal District Meeting 11.11.2020 
 
 
9.2  
Borough District of Wexford Meeting 16.11.2020 
 
 
9.3  
Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting 17.11.2020 
 
 
9.4  
Rosslare Municipal District Meeting 16.11.2020 
 
 
9.5  
Transportation and Water Services SPC 22nd June, 2020 
 
 
The Members noted the Minutes of the above meetings 
 
 
 
10.  
Correspondence and Communications 
 
 
10.1 
Letter from Simon Coveney TD, Minister for Defence and Minister for Foreign  
 
 
Affairs dated 10th December, 2020. 
 
 
10.2 
Email from Department of Social Protection dated 22nd December, 2020 
 
 
The Members noted receipt of the above correspondence 
 
 
11.  
Notices of Motion 
 
11.1  Cllr. Davy Hynes 
 
 
“That this council calls on the Minister for Health to enact it’s own legislation The 
 
 
Public Health (Alcohol) Act 2018 contains plans for MUP to be introduced in  
 
 
Ireland, but the section of the Act that sets out the law on MUP has not been  
 
 
commenced. The increase of alcohol sale by at least 30% has played a part in the  
 
 
increase in infections. This move should also be followed up by a public awareness 
 
 
campaign to educate the public on the misuse of alcohol and the subsequent lack of 
 
 
awareness of measures such as social distancing etc. 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. Hynes, seconded by Cllr. Forde and agreed. 
 
12.  
Any Other Business  
 
 
The Council agreed to write to the Department of an Taoiseach to express its  
 
disappointment at the manner in which the Final Report of the Commission of 
 
Investigation  into Mother and Baby Homes was leaked to media. Cllr. Bridín Murphy 
 
asked that she be noted as abstaining from this resolution. 
 

County Council Meeting 11.01.21 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
 
It was agreed that an update on the Council’s efforts to support a Technological University 
 
for the South East will be presented to the February 2021 monthly meeting of the Council  
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an           lá de  Feabhra, 2021. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
 
Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
________________________ 
County Secretary 
 
