County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 1 of 10 
 
  WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
Held Monday 8 February, 2021 (via MS TEAMS) 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. Ger Carthy, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors: 
 
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BELL 
MAURA 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FORDE 
TOM 
MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
BREEN 
PIP 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
O’ROURKE 
JOHN 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HYNES 
DAVID 
O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
KAVANAGH 
WILLIE 
OWENS 
JACKSER 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
STAPLES 
 FRANK 
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
SULLIVAN 
JOE 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD LISA 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive  
Mr. T. Larkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Ms. C. Godkin, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 2 of 10 
 
Votes of Sympathy:  
 
The Council expressed sympathy to the families of the following recently deceased: 
 
o Mr. Sean Sutton, New Ross 
o Ms. Anne Gardiner, New Ross 
o Mr. John Dunphy, New Ross 
o Ms. Lily Murphy, New Ross 
o Ms. Alice Sinnott, New Ross 
o Mr. Anthony Sinnott, New Ross 
o Mr. Hugo Boyle,  
o Mr. PJ Doyle, Enniscorthy 
o Mr. Nicky Stafford, Gorey 
o Ms. Ann Lambert, Killinick 
o Mr. Gerry Meyler, Tacumshane 
o Mr. Kevin O’Leary, Kilmuckridge 
o Mr. John Dodd, Wexford 
o Mr. Jimmy Murphy, Wexford 
o Ms. Bernie Sheehan, Wexford 
o Mr. William Culleton, Ballycullane 
o Mr. Christy O’Connell, Caim / Rathnure 
o Ms. Nancy Hayden, New Ross 
o Ms. Alice Fitzgerald, Kilmallock, Limerick / Killorglin, Kerry 
 
The Council congratulated the following: 
 
o Mr. James Kehoe, from the Boley Tug-of-War Club, runner-up as “one of the 
greatest athletes of all time” 
o All involve in managing recent serious fire incident at Foggy Dew Wexford, including 
Wexford County Council Fire Services, Housing and Roads staff, an Garda Siochána 
and ESB Networks 
o Wexford Library Services following launch of “On Home Ground” Volumes 2 and 3 
o Good Counsel College New Ross, following their recent listing as the top secondary 
school in Ireland in terms of sporting achievement 
o Mr. Mattie White, following publication of his book “Through a Farmer’s Eyes” 
o All front line workers for their tireless efforts in the challenge of the “third wave” of 
Covid-19 
o Mr. Joe Fortune, following his appointment to the Wexford U21 coaching Panel 
o Wexford Environment Staff for their management of recent significant dumping 
incidents in Kiltealy area 
 
1.  
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
 
1.1. 
County Council Meeting – 11 January, 2021 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. J. Codd the Council resolved to 
 
 
adopt the above Minutes. 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
 
Matters Arising: 
 
 
 
Test Centre: 
 
Cllr. J. Owens and Cllr. C. Byrne, while acknowledging  
 
 
 
 
 
the views of the HSE on the matter, expressed their  
 
 
 
 
 
disappointments that a Covid-19 test center had not been  
 
 
 
 
 
established in Enniscorthy 
 
 
 
Legal Fees: 
 
A/DoS Ms. Carolyne Godkin undertook to update Cllr. J.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fleming in relation to his recent enquiry regarding   
 
 
 
 
 
conveyancing fees 
 
 
 
Land Disposal  
Cllr. Owens requested that the Council consider the disposal 
 
 
 
 
 
of land in Enniscorthy to the Ajax Soccer Club. Cllr. Owens  
 
 
 
 
 
was advised to make contact with the Enniscorthy District  
 
 
 
 
 
Manager to allow the matter to be considered further 
 
 
2. 
Proposed disposal of land under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001: 
 
 
2.1  
Proposed disposal of a plot of land at Mauldintown, Wexford.  (Plot A) 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor seconded by Cllr. L. Kelly, the Council resolved  
 
 
that the proposed disposal should be carried out in accordance with the Notice  
 
 
as circulated. 
 
 
2.2 
 Proposed disposal of a plot of land at Mauldintown, Wexford.  (Plot B) 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor seconded by Cllr. L. Kelly, the Council resolved  
 
 
that the proposed disposal should be carried out in accordance with the Notice  
 
 
as circulated. 
 
3 
Draft Wexford County Council Beach Bye-Laws – For Approval in accordance with Section 
 
199 of the Local Government Act 2001 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. O. Walsh seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell, the Council resolved 
 
that the Draft Beach Byelaws be adopted as circulated. It was noted that the draft Beach 
 
Byelaws will now go forward to a public consultation process, before returning before the 
 
Council for further consideration. 
 
4. 
Report of A/DoS, Housing, Community, Fire and Emergency Management 
 
 
Ms. C. Godkin, A/DoS updated the meeting regarding arrangements for provision of 
 
emergency accommodation of Homeless persons. Members joined in acknowledging the 
 
continuing efforts of staff to support homeless persons.  It was noted that the Council is 
 
actively seeking to identify homeless persons at the earliest opportunity to avoid the 
 
growing challenge of finding emergency accommodation late at night or at weekends. 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
It was agreed that the Members will be informed whenever the Cold Weather Initiative is 
 
activated.  
 
5.  
Chief Executive’s Report 
 
 
The Chief Executive presented the Report and together with the members of the 
 
Management Team responded to a range of queries from the Members,  including 
the 
 
following: 
 
Tech University for the South East -  Two sites in Enniscorthy were brought to the 
attention of the consortium charged with the development of the University. However,  a 
suitable site has been identified in Wexford town and a firm offer has been made to site 
owner. The project is included in the National Development Plan. A building of 10,000 m² is 
proposed in Phase 1 at estimated cost of €41m, with plans to accommodate more than 
2500 students.  
 
Inclusion of Working Family Supplement in calculation of local authority rents – to be 
considered by Housing staff 
 
Progress on the remediation of the site of the oil tanks at New Ross – project to commence 
following lifting of Covid restrictions 
 
Construction of New Ross Fire Station and use of existing fire station site – New Fire Station 
project to commence following lifting of Covid restrictions, while discussions ongoing with 
HSE regarding possible uses of the resulting vacant site 
 
Future plans for Waterford Airport – Application currently before APB which will see 
Government invest €5m as part of an overall €12m investment to extend runway from 
1450m to 2200m – thereby significantly increasing capacity 
 
Templeshannon Enhancement Project – As no responses received to Council’s recent 
tender invitation to appoint consultants, Council is following negotiated tender procedure 
and expects to appoint a consultant before end of March 2021. 
 
Development of Rosslare Europort – WCC’s submission to the National Development Plan 
under the “Review to Renew” initiative will include proposals in respect of Rosslare 
Harbour 
 
Link Road Killeens to Clonard – While full road may not be built at this time, sufficient 
roadway will be constructed to provide access to site of proposed school. Council Planning 
& Roads Depts. have met to agree how they can support this proposed development. 
Technical teams from WCC and WWETB will meet as soon as Covid restrictions allow to 
further progress the matter.  
 
Housing Adaption works – Priority 1 works will continue. Every effort will be made to 
reduce the need for tenants to vacate their properties while works are underway. Where 
vacant possession is need, it was noted that HSE may be able to offer respite to the 
tenants. 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
Courtown Leisure Centre - Progress is being made by the liquidator to find a suitable 
purchaser to acquire and operate the facility. The Council understands that the adjacent C. 
57 acre woodland forms part of the current discussions regarding a possible sale of the 
leisure complex and the Council will as far as possible ensure that this amenity continues to 
be available to the local community. 
 
Camper Van facilities – There is a need for these facilities across the county, particularly in 
the more visited areas and the Council will work with private sector in securing their 
development in appropriate locations. 
 
Site for new secondary school in Gorey – The Department of Education, supported by WCC 
is actively examining a number of sites in the Gorey town area as a suitable location for this 
proposed development. 
   
Carrigfoyle Adventure Centre – The Council, working in partnership with WWETB will 
shortly appoint architects to design the proposed Visitor Centre and is agreeable to engage 
with Healthy Wexford in relation to the project. 
 
3-month waiver of 2021 Commercial Rates – details of the Scheme have been recently 
received by the Council and are being reviewed – Council rates warrant for 2020 was 
approx. €40m – government grant of €15m received towards this. The expected collection 
level for 2020 is likely to be in order of 90% - similar to 2019. 
 
Review of National Development Plan – Wexford County Council will make a submission 
 
Kilmore Quay Sewerage Scheme – The Scheme is separate from the Arthurstown / 
Ballyhack proposed scheme – tenders are due for receipt within 2 weeks 
 
Review of County Development Plan- Meeting of Wexford County Council is planned for 
March / April to consider the outcome of recent public consultation process 
 
Ross Tapestry – Council will engage with the Board of Ros Tapestry to better understand 
the funding needs of the project in the context of the exhibition’s current operational 
status and location. 
 
Min Ryan Skatepark Project – works will commence when Covid restrictions allow 
 
Litter and Dumping – Council to discourage repeat offences by examining waste disposal 
arrangements of prosecuted offenders  
 
Site of former Murphy Floods Hotel – Council is engaging with owners to seek suitable 
redevelopment of site, while discouraging dumping incidence at this location 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 6 of 10 
 
6.  
Minutes of CPG 
 
 
6.1   Minutes of Expanded CPG Covid-19 Committee Meeting 25.01.2021 
 
 
6.2   Minutes of CPG Meeting 01.02.2021 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. J. Sullivan Codd the Council resolved to 
 
adopt the above Minutes 
 
7. 
 Minutes of Meetings (For Noting): 
 
 
7.1  
New Ross Municipal District Meeting – 09.12.2020 
 
 
7.2  
Borough District of Wexford Meeting -  21.12.2020 
 
 
7.3  
Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting 15.12.2020 
 
 
7.4  
Rosslare Municipal District Meeting – 14.12.2020 
 
 
7.5  
Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting 16.11.2020 & 21.12.2020 
 
 
The Council noted the Minutes of the meetings as outlined above 
 
8. Correspondence and Communications 
 
 
8.1  
Email from Patrick McCabe Private Secretary to the Minister for Justice dated 12th 
 
 
January, 2021. 
 
 
8.2  
Email from Frances-Mary Long, Private Secretary to Minister Simon Harris T.D.  
 
 
dated 26th January, 2021. 
 
 
8.3  
Letter from Galway County Council dated 26th January, 2021. 
 
 
8.4  
Letter from Wicklow County Council dated 28th January, 2021. 
 
 
8.5  
Email from Patrick McCabe Private Secretary to the Minister for Justice dated 2nd 
 
 
February, 2021. 
 
 
The Members noted the above correspondence. It was agreed that the County Secretary 
 
will review the response as set out in 7.1 above and to communicate with the Minister 
 
further in this  regard. 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 7 of 10 
 
9.  
Notices of Motion 
 
 
9.1  
Cllr. J. Sullivan 
 
 
 
 “I wish to call on Wexford County Council to make recycling services free of  
 
 
charge at their designated locations around the county. “  I make this call as I  
 
 
believe it would reduce the amount of litter currently been deposited in country  
 
 
areas which I see as getting progressively worse. 
 
 
 
Cllr. J. Sullivan proposed the Motion which was seconded by Cllr. Kenny.  
 
 
 
Following discussion, it was agreed to bring the Motion before the next meeting of 
 
 
the Environmental SPC for further consideration 
 
 
9.2  
Cllr. J. Hegarty 
 
 
 
 “To ensure that the main street of our four district towns remain vibrant, Wexford 
 
 
County Council will require that any vacant premises display graphics depicting a  
 
 
vibrant shop setting in it's windows. Furthermore, it will prohibit large "For  
 
 
Sale/Rent" signs attached to the building and instead have an A3 page displaying 
 
 
the relevant information on the shop window. “ 
 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. J. Hegarty, seconded by Cllr. Kenny and agreed 
 
 
unanimously. 
 
 
9.3  
Cllr. D. Hynes  
 
 
 
“That this government prioritise these ' essential workers' and 'key care partners'. 
 
 
There are 355 thousand family carers in Ireland, over 6,000 living in Co Wexford  
 
 
providing 24/7 care to our most vulnerable citizens and saving the State an  
 
 
estimated €4 billion every year. Family Carers are irreplaceable in the lives of the  
 
 
people they care for and should they become ill or require to self isolate the cared-
 
 
for person's lives will instantly arrive at a crisis situation. Due to lack of investment 
 
 
in disability and elderly services for decades both locally and nationally, the health 
 
 
system does not have available capacity to provide the care provided at home by  
 
 
the family carer should such crisis arrive. Family Carers need to be prioritised for  
 
 
vaccines as a matter of urgency as they have been in many other States within the 
 
 
EU where their value to our vulnerable citizens is recognised and valued as essential 
 
 
to them and to society at large. 
 
 
 
National Carers Strategy 2012, Vision Statement: 
 
 
 
“ Carers will be recognised and respected as key care partners. They will be  
 
 
supported to maintain their health and well being and to care with confidence.  
 
 
They will be empowered to participate as fully as possible in economic and social  
 
 
life “ 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
 
A decade later, January 2021 and no social care support has been offered to carers 
 
 
who are caring for children with disabilities when special schools remain closed and 
 
 
adult Day services remain at much-reduced capacity followed by a blunt statement 
 
 
from the Minister for Health to say that he will not prioritise family carers in COVID-
 
 
19 vaccine rollout. 
 
 
 
Visions are wonderful but reality is where we live.” 
 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. D. Hynes, seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell and agreed 
 
 
unanimously. 
 
 
9.4  
Cllr. G. Lawlor 
 
 
 
“Wexford Co. Council supports the provision of Free Travel for People with Epilepsy 
 
 
and for Reasonable Accommodations for students with epilepsy who may have a  
 
 
seizure during state examinations.” 
 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes and agreed 
 
 
unanimously. 
 
 
9.5 
Cllr. C. Byrne 
 
 
 
“Wexford County Council calls on the Minister for the Environment Eamon Ryan  
 
 
T.D. to amend the Litter Pollution Act 1997 and the Waste Management Act 1996 
 
 
to provide a clear statutory framework for the use of CCTV by Local Authorities to 
 
 
deter and prosecute litter offences within their administrative areas.” 
 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. C. Byrne, seconded by Cllr. K. Codd Nolan and  
 
 
agreed unanimously. 
 
 
 
9.6  
Cllr. T. Forde & Cllr. F. O’Suilleabhán  
 
 
 
"This council recognises that the income limits for social housing support applicants 
 
 
prevent many families, who are not in a position to obtain a mortgage or to pay  
 
 
high rents, from securing a home. This council calls on Fianna Fáil Minister Darragh 
 
 
O Brien to review and amend these income limits/thresholds without delay". 
 
 
 
The question of determining an appropriate income limit was considered   
 
 
briefly by the Members but not decided upon 
 
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes and agreed 
 
 
unanimously.  
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
 
9.7  
Cllr. G. Lawlor 
 
 
 
“Wexford Co. Council calls on the Government to alter legislation transposing the 
 
 
EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) into Irish law amending it to ensure 
 
 
that; 
 
(a) 
Communities and councils have ease of access to CCTV to protect them 
against crime and anti social behaviour including illegal dumping and fly 
tipping 
 
(b) 
to ensure that councillors are given access to housing allocation information 
to enable the fair and transparent allocation of housing resources.  
 
 
The Motion was proposed by Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. G. Laffan and agreed unanimously. 
 
10. 
Any Other Business  
 
 
Cllr. L. Kelly sought to introduce a Notice of Motion, notice of which had not been given to 
 
the Meeting.  A number of members expressed the view that as the matter was not listed 
 
on the Agenda, they had insufficient opportunity to familiarize themselves with the 
 
content of the issue. 
 
 
As required under Standing Order No. 20, the decision to hear the Motion or not was put 
 
to a vote for the necessary approval of not less than 18 Members. The vote was taken by 
 
roll call and the outcome of that vote was as follows: 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
F FARRELL 
MARY 
F MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
A 
BELL 
MAURA 
F FLEMING 
JOHN 
A MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
AB 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
A FORDE 
TOM 
F O’ROURKE 
JOHN 
F 
BREEN 
PIP 
A HEGARTY 
JOHN 
A O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
F 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
A HYNES 
DAVID 
F OWENS 
JACKSER 
F 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
A KAVANAGH 
WILLIE 
A SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
AB 
CARTHY 
GER 
F KELLY 
LEONARD 
F STAPLES 
 FRANK 
AB 
CODD 
JIM 
F KENNY 
DONAL 
A SULLIVAN 
JOE 
A 
CODD-
NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
F LAFFAN 
GARY 
A WALSH 
OLIVER 
A 
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
F LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
F WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
A 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID A MCDONALD 
LISA 
A WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
  
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
A MOORE 
JIM 
A   
  
  
F = For, A = Against, AB = Absent /Abstain 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 08.02.21 
 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
As the proposal failed to get the necessary 18 votes, the Motion could not be considered. It 
 
was agreed that the Motion would be placed on the Agenda for the March 2021 of 
 
the Council for consideration.  
 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Moore it was agreed that the 
 
membership of the Council’s Protocol Committee be expanded to include the Council’s 
 
representatives to LAMA and the AILG 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. J. Sullivan it was agreed that a number 
 
of Notices of Motion recently submitted to the Housing SPC would be added to Agenda of 
 
the March 2021 monthly meeting of Wexford County Council for consideration. 
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an           lá de  Márta, 2021. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
 
Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
________________________ 
County Secretary 
 
