County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
1
   
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
held on Monday 29 June, 2020 – 11.30 a.m.  
in the “Street”, County Hall, Wexford. 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. M. Sheehan, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors:  
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD 
LISA 
BELL 
MAURA 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
BREEN 
PIP 
FORDE 
TOM 
MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
O'ROURKE 
JOHN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
HYNES 
DAVID 
O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
CARTHY 
GER 
KAVANAGH WILLIE 
OWENS 
JACKSER 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD 
STAPLES 
FRANK 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
SULLIVAN 
JOE 
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive 
Mr. T. Larkin, Director of Services 
Ms. C.  Godkin, A/Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
 
Apologies:  
None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
2
1.  
PowerPoint Presentation – N11 / N25 Oilgate to Rosslare Harbour Scheme–  
 
 
 
Sean Dobbs, TII, Joe Shinkwin, Mott McDonald Consultants 
 
 
Mr. Dobbs and Mr. Shinkwin attended the meeting and provided a comprehensive 
 
overview of the proposed Scheme. Following the presentation, they responded to a 
 
number of matters raised by the members, including the following: 
 
 Timeline for the proposed project – pace of implementation. 
 Project funding. 
 Planning implications for landowners in the vicinity. 
 Economic benefits for towns / villages along the route. 
 Communication with the public. 
 
 
 
2.  
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
 
2.1  
County Council Meeting – 9th March, 2020 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. O’Rourke and agreed. 
 
 
3. 
Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations 
 
 
3.1 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
 
 
The Council extended it’s sympathy to the families of the following recently 
 
 
deceased: 
 
 
 
See Appendix A attached. 
3.  
 
3.2 
Vóta Comhghairdeas 
 
 
 
Dean na Comharleoirí comhghairdeas ar na ndhaoine as seo a leannas: 
 
 
 
Wexford Ladies Football   
for their successful fundraiser for the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women's Refuge and to all the GAA clubs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who took part in the fundraiser for Pieta  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
House. 
 
 
 
Community of Baginbun   
who won its first Greencoast award, with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thanks to the locals, visitors and also the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council’s Environment section. 
 
 
 
Gorey boxer Níall Kennedy  
recently nominated as "Hero of the World" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the World Boxing Council recently. 
 
 
 
Kilmore native Sam Kendrick,  
recently honoured by the Dutch   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government  for his role in the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
liberation of the Netherlands during the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second World War. 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
3
 
 
Slaney Search & Rescue  
celebrating 25 years in operation. 
 
 
 
Marguerite Gore 
 
 
for her contribution to the sport of Handball 
 
 
 
Pat Collins 
 
 
 
former Wexford County Council County  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretary, on his recent retirement,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following 42 years of service to the Council  
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Farrell 
 
for her social media contribution (Mary’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lockdown hits) to the fight against Covid- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
 
 
Lee Whelan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  
Proposal under Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
 
4.1  
Proposed lease of land at Maudlintown, Wexford.  
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr B.A. Murphy and agreed. 
 
 
 
Tom Enright C.E. paid tribute to developer, Anthony Neville, philanthropist  
 
 
Fred Karlsson, Council officials Tony Larkin and Shay Howell and all who  
 
 
helped advance this project, which will see the development of a purpose- 
 
 
built building for the Wexford Rape and Sexual Support Services on a  
 
 
Council-owned site at Maudlintown, Wexford. 
 
 
5. 
Annual Financial Statement (AFS) 2019  
 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance in relation 
 
to the 2019 AFS, and on the proposal of Cllr. Carthy, seconded by Councillor Bell, 
 
the Members resolved, in accordance with S.104 of the Local Government Act 
 
2001, to authorise the additional expenditure incurred, as detailed in the Report. 
 
 
6. 
Borrowing Approval 
 
 
6.1 
Bank Overdraft Accommodation 
 
 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance  
 
 
dated 15 April 2020  and on the proposal of Cllr. Bell, seconded by Cllr. B.A. 
 
 
Murphy, the Members resolved to approve an increase in the Council’s  
 
 
overdraft facilities to €30 million, in accordance with S.106 of the Local  
 
 
Government Act 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
4
6.2 
Rebuilding Ireland Home Loans (RIHL) – Associated Borrowing Requirements  
 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance dated 7 
 
June, 2020 and on the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. McDonald, 
 
the Members resolved to approve borrowing by the Council of: 
 
 
 
 €6,894,370 to fund the RIHL programme for the remainder of 2019, and   
 €6,558,101 to fund 2020 approvals.  
 
 
 
in accordance with S.106 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
7. 
Q1 Finance Report 2020 
 
 
Noted. 
 
8.  
Financial Overview 
 
 
Ms. A. O’Neill Head of Finance presented a Report to the members which detailed 
 
the possible financial impact of the Covid-19 Public Health Emergency on the 
 
Council’s finances. 
 
 
Following the presentation, Ms. O’Neill and members of the Management Team  
 
responded to a number of matters raised by the members, including the following: 
 
 Extension of the 2020 commercial rates waiver scheme beyond three 
months. 
 The likelihood of recovery of the significant loss of income incurred by the 
Council to date as a result of Covid-19.  
 Estimates of the expected financial loss to the Council as a result of Covid-
19. 
 The seeking of Government financial support to offset anticipated loss of 
income. 
 Council-arranged workshops to support local business seeking to tender for 
Council services. 
 Leniency in respect of parking charges and commercial rates. 
 The impact of the likely loss of income on the filling of vacant staff positions. 
 
 
There followed a discussion regarding the 1798 Rebellion Centre in Enniscorthy. It 
 
was noted that in 2018, the Council had resolved to dispose of the property, but that 
 
the proposed purchaser had withdrawn from the purchase. The Council had 
 
subsequently been approached by a further interested purchaser, and while this 
 
was being examined, the final decision as to any sale of the property was a 
 
matter for the members in accordance with S.183 of the Local Government 
 
Act 2001. 
 
 
It was now clear that many of the members of the Enniscorthy Municipal District 
 
were not in favour of a sale of the property, and as their consent to such a sale was 
 
required, a sale of the Centre is no longer under consideration at this time. 
 
 
It was further noted that current proposals to develop a landmark Enniscorthy 
 
Tourism Project includes proposals to re-accommodate the 1798 Exhibition and 
 
Visitor Experience within that venue. 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
5
 
At this point, the Meeting adjourned for lunch. 
 
 
9. 
Section 55 Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) -  Proposed 
 
addition to the record of protected structures - Famine Wall on lands at 
 
Ballyhogue, Bree, Co. Wexford.  
 
 
Before discussion commenced on this Agenda item, Cllr. C. Byrne declared that a 
 
connected person held a beneficial interest in the matter. Cllr. Byrne then 
 
temporarily withdrew from the meeting In accordance with S. 177 of the Local 
 
Government Act 2001 and remained absent for so long as the matter was under 
 
discussion. 
 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Mr. D Houston, Senior Planner on the 
 
matter, and on the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne, the 
 
Council resolved to  amend the Record of Protected Structures to include Famine 
 
Wall on lands at Ballyhogue, Bree, Co. Wexford.  
 
 
Following the above discussion and resolution, Cllr. C. Byrne rejoined the meeting.
 
 
 
10. 
County Wexford Road Traffic Special Speed Limit (Amendment) Bye Laws   
 
2020. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Breen, seconded by Cllr. Ó Súilleabháin, the Council 
 
resolved to adopt the County Wexford Road Traffic Special Speed Limit 
 
(Amendment) Bye Laws 2020. 
 
 
11 
Annual Service Delivery Plan - Quarter 1 Report 
 
 
The Members noted the Report and welcomed evidence of progress in achieving 
 
the objectives of the Plan. 
 
 
12 
Chief Executive’s Report 
 
 
C.E. Mr. Tom Enright presented the Report and together with the members of the 
 
Management Team responded to a range of related queries, including the following: 
 
Provision of a technological University for the South East -  It 
was 
noted 
that, 
Carlow IT has engaged with Wexford County Council on this issue and a meeting 
has been arranged between representatives of the college and Wexford County 
Council  to progress matters. 
 
Possible increase in grant aid for the improvement of septic tanks -  It 
was 
noted 
this is the Minister announced a revision to the scheme in late May 2020, with 85% 
grant aid up to €5,000 now available to all eligible homeowners regardless of 
income levels. Any further alterations or amendments to the scheme would require 
Department approval.   
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional secondary schools for County Wexford with a view to increasing child 
 
places - It was noted that no approaches have been made to the Planning  
 
Department regarding the construction of additional schools. 
 
Provision of capital projects in Enniscorthy - The CE outlined a range of measures 
recently completed in Enniscorthy and  provided details of others currently in 
progress which will when completed significantly improve Enniscorthy’s social and 
economic outlook. 
 
 
Funding and Timeline for the redevelopment of Hook Tourism Project. 
 
 
The restructuring of roads projects to incorporate improved cycling facilities. 
 
 
Speeding up the delivery of the National Broadband Plan in County Wexford. 
 
 
The provision of countywide Meals on Wheels service to address social isolation 
 
issues. 
 
 
In the context of the County Development Plan, the need to protect rural way of life 
 
while meeting reasonable planning and environmental guidelines and requirements. 
 
 
Recent incident of flash flooding in Market Square Enniscorthy. 
 
 
The excellent services offered by Wexford’s public libraries through the challenges 
 
of Covid-19. 
 
 
13 
List of Councillors’ Conferences and Training  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, and in 
accordance with S. 142 of the Local Government Act 2001, the Council approved 
attendance at the following events: 
 
 Online Training – Effective Social Media Sessions 
 Online training beyond Coronavirus 
 
The Council also noted Conference Report – Cllr. G. Laffan (Health & Safety in the 
Workplace) and AILG Plenary Members Activity Report for May 2020. 
 
14. 
Report of Corporate Policy Group  
 
14.1 CPG Meeting 22.06.20 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. McDonald and agreed. 
 
 
15. 
Minutes of Meetings: 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
7
 
15.1  Borough District of Wexford Meeting 17.02.2020 
 
 
15.2  Rosslare Municipal District Meeting 17.02.2020 
 
15.3  Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting 18.02.2020 
 
 
15.4  New Ross Municipal District Meeting 12.02.2020 & 11.03.2020 
 
 
15.5  Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting 17.02.2020 
15.6 Transportation and Water Services SPC Minutes 14.11.2019 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. A. Connick, seconded by Cllr. G. Carthy and agreed. 
 
 
16.  
Sealing of Documents 
 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Hynes, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy and agreed. 
 
 
17.  
Correspondence and Communications 
 
 
 
The Council noted receipt of the following items of correspondence: 
 
 Letter from Foreign Affairs Office of the people’s Government of Yingtan City 
dated 2nd March, 2020. 
 
 Letter from Ying Yong, Secretary of the CPC Hubei Provincial Committee dated 
13th March, 2020. 
 
 Letter from Wu Zhongqiong, Vice Governor of the People’s Government of 
Jiangxi Province China dated 16th March, 2020. 
 
 Letter from Wang Xiaodong, Governor of Hubei Province dated 17th March, 
2020. 
 
 Letter from Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government dated 19th 
March, 2020. 
 
 Email from Lucia Butler, London Wexford Association Chairperson dated 20th 
March, 2020. 
 
 Email from Gerard Dollard, Chief Executive Officer, Irish Greyhound Board 
dated 6th May, 2020. 
 
 Email from Jenny Lawlor, Irish Water dated 8th May, 2020. 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
8
18. 
Deferred Notices of Motion 
 
18.1  Cllr. T. Forde 
 
 
“Wexford County Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the 
 
necessary excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, 
 
Michael Fagan, Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the 
 
Invincibles Yard at Kilmainham jail. 
 
 
The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie beneath the 
 
paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the 
 
Phoenix Park assassinations. 
 
 
The families of the five men are represented by the National Graves Association 
 
and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from Kilmainham jail 
 
and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.” 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. F. Ó’Súilleabháin and agreed. 
 
 
19. 
Notices of Motion 
 
19.1 Cllr. B.A. Murphy  
 
 
"That Wexford County Council formally recogonise the local Women's Caucus. This 
 
organisation is a group of female Elected Councillors, whose membership is 
 
committed to ensuring that female members are supported in the Local Government 
 
system, to ensure Members get the support required in political life." 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. L. McDonald and agreed. 
 
19.2  Cllr. M. Whelan 
 
 
“That Wexford County Council supports the “The National Small Business Plan “ in 
 
order to protect the thousands of jobs in Wexford County the SMEs provide to our 
 
citizens. That Wexford County Council request the Government to fund and urgently 
 
implement the actions of the “Plan” using EU funding recovery streams. 
 
The “Covid-19 Regional Economic Analysis “ report independently carried out and 
 
published by the three Regional Assemblies of Ireland, who play a leadership role in 
 
regional development, has identified the extent of the severe economic exposure to 
 
the impact of Covid-19 to commercial businesses in County Wexford” 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. L. McDonald and agreed. 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 29.06.20 
 
 
9
 
19.3  Cllr. Tom Forde 
 
 
‘This Council sends condolences to the family of the late George Floyd and 
 
condemns the appalling murder of him in Minneapolis at the hands of a police 
 
officer and, by extension, all inappropriate and disproportionate force used by police 
 
departments across the USA.   
 
 
Furthermore this Council wishes to convey to the US  Ambassador in Ireland its 
 
deep concern about the murder and subsequent heavy handed police response to 
 
peaceful protestors who reacted to Mr Floyds death with revulsion.  
 
 
This Council, as a result of the murder and response to protests, calls on the 
 
Minister of Foreign Affairs in Ireland to contact the US Ambassador and, in turn, to 
 
convey to the President and government of the USA our condemnation of these 
 
actions.’ 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes and agreed. 
 
 
20. 
Any Other Business   
 
 
It was noted that any Councillor who wished to be considered for membership of the 
 
Wexford County Council Committee on Mental Health & Well-Being should make 
 
their interest  known to the County Secretary. 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an 27ú la de Iúil, 2020. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Cathaoirleach 
 
 
________________________ 
County Secretary 
 
 
 
 
