County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council held on Monday 12th February 2024 in the Council 
Chamber at 2.30pm (with some remote attendance via Microsoft Teams) 
Attendance: 
In the Chair: Cllr. John Fleming, Cathaoirleach 
Councillors: 
Barden 
Pat  
(online) 
Donohoe 
Anthony 
 
Murphy 
Barbara-
Anne 
Bell 
Maura  
 
Farrell 
Mary 
 
Murphy 
Bridín 
 
Bolger 
Andrew  
Forde  
Tom 
O’Rourke 
John 
(online) 
Breen 
Pip 
Hegarty  
John  
Ó’Súilleabháin 
Fionntáin 
 
Browne 
Aidan 
Hynes 
David  
(online) 
Owens 
Jackser 
(online) 
Byrne 
Cathal 
Kavanagh 
Willie 
Sheehan 
Michael 
 
Carthy 
Ger 
Kelly 
Leonard 
(online) 
Staples 
Frank  
 
Codd 
Jim 
 
Kenny 
Donal 
Sullivan 
Joe 
 
Codd-
Nolan 
Kathleen 
Laffan 
Garry 
(online) 
Walsh 
Oliver 
 
Connick 
Anthony  
(online) 
Lawlor  
George 
Whelan 
 Michael 
 
Devereux 
Diarmuid 
(online) 
Moore 
Jim 
 
 
Officials: 
Mr. Tom Enright, Chief Executive 
Mr. Eamonn Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. Lynda Lacey, A/Head of Finance 
Mr. Eddie Taaffe, Director of Services 
Ms. Elizabeth Hore, Director of Services  
Ms Carolyne Godkin, Director of Services 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
Ms. Amanda Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. Michael Drea, County Secretary 
Apologies:  
Cllr. Lisa McDonald 
Votes of sympathy: 
The Cathaoirleach offered the sympathy of the Council to:  
• The family of Martin Ryan, former employee and husband of Anita Ryan,  
      former employee. 
• The family of Michael Duffin, father of Michelle Duffin, New Ross Municipal District. 
• The family of Catherine Ryan, mother of John Cunningham-Ryan, Library Services.  
• The family of Patrick (Paddy) Doran, father of Damien Doran and Dermot Doran, 
Gorey/Kilmuckridge Municipal District. 
• The family of Fr. John P. Nolan, Parish Priest of Duncannon. 
• The family of Marjorie Allen, Wexford Town. 
• The family of Michael (Mike) Hennessy, Barntown. 
• The family of John Furlong, Clonroche. 
 
Cllr. J. Moore asked that the sympathy of the Council be extended to the Bruton family on the passing of 
former Taoiseach John Bruton. Cllr. Moore acknowledged what he achieved through his social policy and the 
vital part he played in developing the framework for the peace process. Cllr. Moore also noted that the 
government formed by John Bruton had three Ministers from the Wexford constituency. 
Congratulations: 
There were no congratulations recorded. 
 
1. 
Confirmation of Minutes 
1.1 
County Council Meeting 8th January, 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy and seconded by Cllr. M. Sheehan the Council resolved 
to confirm the Minutes of the County Council Meeting on 8th January 2024.  
Matters arising: 
Cllr. G. Carthy enquired if there was any update from An Bord Pleanála on the Section 5 application 
submitted by Wexford County Council. Cllr. Carthy also sought clarity in relation to the retention 
application submitted by the developer and queried if the Council can validate a planning 
application for the site when there is no decision on the Section 5 application. 
1.2 
Special Meeting of Wexford County Council (Housing) 8th January, 2024On the proposal of 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy and seconded by Cllr. K. Codd Nolan the Council 
resolved to confirm the Minutes of the County Council (Housing) Meeting on 8th January 
2024.  
Matters arising: 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
Cllr. G. Carthy enquired what the delay is in producing an affordable housing strategy which he 
requested months earlier. 
Cllr. F. Ó’Súilleabháin noted that an affordable housing survey is being conducted and sought 
reassurance that this won’t delay matters. 
2. 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001: 
2.1      Consideration of the renewal of the lease of property at Coolcotts Community Centre 
to Clonard Area Development Association Ltd. 
 On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. J. Hegarty the Council resolved to renew 
the lease of property at Coolcotts Community Centre to Clonard Area Development 
Association Ltd., in accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
2.2      Intention to dispose of property at 7 Old Garden City, Gorey, Co. Wexford 
 On the proposal of Cllr. D. Kenny, seconded by Cllr. J. Sullivan the Council resolved to dispose 
of property at 7 Old Garden City, Gorey, Co. Wexford, in accordance with the terms set out in 
the S.183 Notice as circulated.  
 
3. 
Part XI of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations, 2001 (as amended): 
3.1      LAC2305 - Proposed residential development of 60 no. units in a mix of 1, 2 and 3 bed 
units, and all ancillary site and enabling works at Killeens, Wexford, Co. Wexford.      
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. J. Hegarty, seconded by 
Cllr. T. Forde, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for the construction of 60 no. units in a mix 
of 1, 2 and 3 bed units, and all ancillary site and enabling works at Killeens, Wexford, Co. Wexford.     
in accordance with the terms of LAC2305, as circulated. 
3.2      LAC2313 - Provide a public realm space which will incorporate a playground for younger 
children, seating, a pocket park, lighting and landscaping at Kilmuckridge, Co. Wexford.  
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell, seconded by 
Cllr. W. Kavanagh, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for a public realm space which will 
incorporate a playground for younger children, seating, a pocket park, lighting and landscaping at 
Kilmuckridge, Co. Wexford in accordance with the terms of LAC2313, as circulated. 
4. 
Wexford County Council Revised DRAFT Climate Action Plan 2024 -2029 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 
2021 as it amends the principle Act of 2015, on the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell, seconded by Cllr. W. 
Kavanagh, Wexford County Council resolved to adopt the Wexford County Council Climate Action 
Plan 2024 – 2029, having considered the draft plan, the contents of the Chief Executive’s report on 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
submissions received during the period of consultation and the SEA and AA reports and 
determinations, carried out in accordance with the requirements and regulatory provisions of the 
SEA Directive (DIR 2001/42/EC) and Article 6(3) of the EU Habitats Directive (Directive 92/43/EEC). 
 
Mr. T. Enright thanked Ms. C. Godkin and her team for the huge work which went into drafting the 
Plan. 
 
5. 
Wexford County Council DRAFT Litter Management Plan 2024 – 2027 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell, seconded by Cllr. G. Lawlor, the Council resolved to move to 
public consultation on the Draft Litter Management Plan 2024 - 2027, as outlined in the circulated 
memo. 
6. 
Audit Committee Annual Reports 
 
The Members noted the Audit Committee Annual Reports. 
 
7. 
Invitation from New Ross’ Sister City of Hartford to attend the 52nd Annual Greater Hartford St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade – 9th March, 2024 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A. Connick, seconded by Cllr. M. Whelan, the Council resolved to approve to 
send a delegation of two Members to Hartford to attend the 52nd Annual Greater Hartford St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade on 9th March, 2024. 
 
8. 
Chief Executive’s Report 
 
On the occasion of Chief Executive Tom Enright’s last Council meeting, Cathaoirleach J. Fleming 
advised the Members that Mr. Enright would make a presentation prior to taking questions on the 
Chief Executive’s report. 
 
Mr. T. Enright said he wished to acknowledge the work done in collaboration with the Members 
over his ten-year tenure as Chief Executive. Mr. Enright detailed the work done to establish the 
Municipal District offices, the Council’s response to major emergencies whilst acknowledging Billy 
Kinsella’s tragic passing, the Council’s response to Covid, and Cllr. Fergie Kehoe’s tragic passing.  
 
Mr. Enright acknowledged some of the major social and economic infrastructural projects delivered 
and thanked the Members for their commitment in funding such projects and the Fleadh bid. 
Looking to the future, Mr. Enright said it is important to increase the numbers visiting tourist 
attractions in Wexford, and he emphasised the importance of progressing the advance factory in 
New Ross and the Kilmore Quay Business Park.  
After a sustained round of applause, the Members spoke glowingly about Mr. Enright’s contribution 
to Wexford and the legacy he leaves behind. Numerous contributors spoke of his vision, integrity, 
ambition, approachability, honesty, courtesy, empathy, and respect. The following Members paid 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
tribute to Mr. Enright’s tenure: Pip Breen, George Lawlor, Davy Hynes, Michael Whelan, John 
Hegarty, Michael Sheehan, Willie Kavanagh, Ger Carthy, Fionntáin Ó’Súilleabháin, Barbara Anne 
Murphy, Joe Sullivan, Jackser Owens, Jim Codd, Mary Farrell, Oliver Walsh, Kathleen Codd Nolan, 
Anthony Connick, Garry Laffan, Andrew Bolger, Aidan Browne, Frank Staples, Cathal Byrne, Donal 
Kenny, Bridín Murphy, and John Fleming. 
 
Mr. E. Hore spoke on behalf of the Management Team and acknowledged the huge contribution 
made by Mr. T. Enright to County Wexford during his tenure and spoke of the enduring legacy he 
leaves behind. 
The meeting adjourned for a comfort break at this point. 
The Chief Executive and members of the Management Team responded to a wide range of queries 
from the Elected Members regarding the following: 
 
• How is the Council going to deal with the disproportionate distribution of migrants in Wexford? 
Request that a letter be sent to the Minister addressing the disproportionate distribution. 
• Congratulations to LEO on creating the second highest number of jobs in the Country. 
• Are there many public lights left to be converted to LED? 
• Request for update on master plan of Killeens land. 
• Status of discussions with SETU, FAI, GAA and Department of Education in relation to master 
planning. 
• Can a representative body for disabilities be added as a notifiable body for the purpose of 
planning applications?  
• It was noted that rates bills have been altered to remove the notification that you can pay your 
bill at the post office. It was agreed that future bills will include the post office as a payment 
facility. 
• Update on Trinity Wharf progress. 
• Disbelief expressed that north Wexford is getting only €50,000 out of €3.75m active travel 
funding.  
• What applications for active travel funding were made for north Wexford? 
• Request that the unsuccessful applications for north Wexford be analysed to establish why they 
didn’t receive funding. 
• Does Wexford County Council have a role in identifying accommodation centres? 
• Frustration expressed in relation to SETU’s delay in providing information for master planning. 
• Request for bus stops in Bunclody to be funded through active travel. 
• When will the register of electors be available? 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
• What is the status of the 65-unit development in Bunclody? 
• Who will house Ukranians after 90-day period has elapsed? 
• How many litter fines are paid in full, how many partially paid, and how many stopped? 
• Number of vacancies in the Fire Service? 
• Does the word of the Members get taken into consideration when it comes to housing 
allocations? 
• When is a decision made to allocate on the basis of a special category? 
• Is time back on the list assessed on a case-by-case basis? 
• Request for realistic timeframe for completion of works on Fisher’s Row. 
• Concern expressed in relation to unofficial road closures into estates around Wexford Park on 
match days and Wexford County Council’s role in relation to this. 
• Has there been an update in relation to the Mica/Pyrite redress scheme? 
• Timeline for Enniscorthy Town Plan? 
• Commencement of works on the N80 welcomed but request for larger speed signs. 
• Timeline for conclusion of advance factory negotiations and commencement of work? 
• Request for upgrade of New Ross library. 
• Request for Council to contact the owners of the albatross site to explore the possibility of 
acquiring land for sports campus use. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy the Council resolved to 
suspend standing orders to allow the meeting to continue past 5.30pm. 
 
• Timeline for demolition of Murphy Floods. 
• Is there an option to look at one footpath project per district under active travel funding? 
• Can an e-mail notification be incorporated into the CBL system notifying applicants if they have 
been unsuccessful? 
 
Cllr.’s G. Carthy and K.C. Nolan left the meeting at this point. 
 
• Issues raised in relation to Ballytegan road. 
• Dissatisfaction raised over delays in payment of Acres scheme, the importation of white thorn 
for the Acres scheme rather than local supply, and the change in the VAT rate for farm 
equipment. 
• Six streetlights in Ballymitty need to be illuminated. 
• Timeline for development of housing site in Taghmon? 
• 
Concerns raised over removal of barrier at St. Aidan’s school. 
• 
Request that pedestrian crossings be provided at schools. 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
• 
Request that National Broadband Plan Co-ordinator attend a Council meeting. 
• 
Timeline for N11/N25 road project? 
• 
Request that polling stations be accessible. 
• 
Request for updated contact details for staff and their departments. 
• 
Request for dates and times for vacant homes roadshow. 
• 
Concern over length of time taken to draw down Croí Conaithe grants. 
• 
What is the average time between final inspection and Croí Conaithe grant being paid? 
• 
Date for appointment of Heritage Officer? 
 
9. 
Minutes of CPG Meeting 6th February, 2024 
 
9.1  Minutes of CPG Meeting 6th February, 2024 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy the Council resolved to adopt 
the minutes of the CPG meeting of 6th February, 2024. 
 
10. 
Minutes for Noting 
Minutes of Meetings (For Noting): 
10.1    New Ross Municipal District Meeting – 13th December, 2023   
10.2    Rosslare Municipal District Meeting – 13th December, 2023   
10.3    Borough District of Wexford Meeting – 16th December, 2023   
10.4    Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting – 18th December, 2023   
10.5    Gorey-Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting – 19th December, 2023   
10.6    Protocol Committee Meeting  -  11th April, 2023 
10.7    Planning & Building Control SPC 12th October, 2023 
The members noted the above minutes. 
11.  
Correspondence and Communications 
11.1    Letters from Offaly County Council re: motions 20th December, 2023 & 16th January, 2024 
11.2    Letter from Carlow County Council re: motion dated 22nd January, 2024 
11.3    Letter from Department of Social Protection re motion dated 24th January, 2024 
11.4    Letter from Sligo County Council re motion dated 30th January, 2024 
 
The members noted the above correspondence. 
 
12.  
Councillor’s Conferences and Training  
12.1    List of Conferences/Training – List Attached 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. M. Whelan, the Council approved 
attendance for the following conferences and training: 
 
Training 
25th January – Local Authority Energy and Climate Action Information Seminar – Seven Oaks Hotel, 
Carlow. 
 
25th January – AILG Module 1 Training “Elected Members Briefing: Annual Declarations, Donations, 
Code of Conduct, and Local Representation Allowance update” – The Fairways Hotel, Dundalk (out 
of region). 
 
27th January – AILG Module 1 Training “Elected Members Briefing: Annual Declarations, Donations, 
Code of Conduct, and Local Representation Allowance update” – Greenhills Conference & Leisure 
Centre, Limerick (Southern region). 
 
7th- 8th February – Association of Irish Regional Annual Training Seminar 2024 “Building capacity to 
address the challenges of a changing Ireland – Fitzgerald’s Woodlands Hotel, Limerick. €160 
 
Conferences 
23rd – 25th February – Celtic Conferences – “The First Home Scheme – Helping Home Owners Get 
Onto The Property Ladder” – Carlingford, Co. Louth. €130 
 
1st – 3rd March – Celtic Conferences – “A Practical Guide to Personal taxation in Ireland” – 
Clonakilty, Co. Cork. €130. 
 
12.2    Councillor’s Conference Reports: 
• 
Cllr. J. Sullivan – The Finance Act 2023, Carlingford, Co. Louth. 
 
The members noted the above report, as circulated. 
 
13. 
Notices of Motion  
 
The notices of motion were deferred until the March meeting. 
 
14. 
Any Other Business. 
 
Mr. M. Drea informed the meeting that Cllr. G. Lawlor had expressed an interest in filling the 
vacancy on the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee (LTACC) created by Cllr. L. 
Kelly’s resignation. On the proposal of Cllr. M. Bell, seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, Cllr. G. Lawlor 
was appointed to the LTACC. 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

County Council Meeting 12.02.24 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Márta, 2024. 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr. John Fleming 
 
 
 
 
Michael Drea,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
