County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 1 of 9 
 
  WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council  
Held remotely on Monday 9 November, 2020 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. Ger Carthy, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors:  
 
 
BARDEN 
PAT 
FARRELL 
MARY 
MOORE 
JIM 
BELL 
MAURA 
FLEMING 
JOHN 
MURPHY 
BARBARA-
ANNE 
BOLGER 
ANDREW 
FORDE 
TOM 
MURPHY 
BRIDIN 
BREEN 
PIP 
HEGARTY 
JOHN 
O'ROURKE 
JOHN 
BROWNE 
AIDAN 
HYNES 
DAVID 
O'SUILLEABHAIN FIONNTAIN 
BYRNE 
CATHAL 
KAVANAGH 
WILLIE 
OWENS 
JACKSER 
CODD 
JIM 
KELLY 
LEONARD SHEEHAN 
MICHAEL 
CODD-NOLAN 
KATHLEEN 
KENNY 
DONAL 
  
  
CONNICK 
ANTHONY 
LAFFAN 
GARY 
SULLIVAN 
JOE 
DEVEREUX 
DIARMUID 
LAWLOR 
GEORGE 
WALSH 
OLIVER 
DONOHOE 
ANTHONY 
MCDONALD LISA 
WHELAN 
MICHAEL 
 
 
Officials: 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Enright, Chief Executive  
Mr. T. Larkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. A. O’Neill, Head of Finance 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Ms. C. Godkin, A/Director of Services 
Mr. D. Minogue, County Secretary 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
1.1 County Council Meeting – 14th September, 2020 
1.2 Special County Council Meeting - 14th September, 2020 
1.3 Budget Working Group Meeting – 2nd November, 2020 
 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes and agreed 
unanimously the Council resolved to adopt each of the above Minutes. 
 
 
2. Amendment to Standing Orders – Remote Meetings 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. J. Moore and agreed 
unanimously the Council resolved to amend its Standing Orders by insertion of 
Standing Orders (6)a to (6)h as circulated and considered. 
 
The Members expressed their desire to hold physical meetings of the Council as a first 
choice and to limit remote meetings of the Council to essential circumstances only. 
 
 
3. Notice under Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001: 
 
3.1 Proposed disposal of property at Spawell Road and 1798 Street, Wexford.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. J. Hegarty the Council 
resolved to dispose of the above property in accordance with the Section 183 
Notice as circulated. 
 
 
4. Part XI of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8, of 
the Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 (as amended): 
 
4.1 LAC 2001 – Proposed development - Alterations to the Ballast Office to facilitate a 
change of use from office to shop/restaurant. The Ballast Building is a protected 
structure (RPS No. WBC0120) at Ballast Office, Crescent Quay, Wexford.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Bell, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes the Council resolved 
that the development should be carried out in accordance with the Report of the 
Chief Executive as circulated. 
 
 
5. Proposal under Section 106 of the Local Government Act, 2001: 
 
5.1 Approval sought for borrowing by way of temporary overdraft accommodation of  
 
€20m for the financial year to 31st December, 2021. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Sullivan, seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny the Council 
resolved to approve the borrowing proposal as outlined above. 
 
 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
6. Section 55 Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended):  
 
6.1 Proposal to add a Famine Wall on lands at Ballyhogue, Bree, to the Record of 
 
Protected Structures.  
 
 
Before discussion commenced on this Agenda item, Cllr. C. Byrne declared that a 
 
connected person held a beneficial interest in the matter. Cllr. Byrne then 
 
temporarily withdrew from the meeting In accordance with S. 177 of the Local 
 
Government Act 2001 and remained absent for so long as the matter was under 
 
discussion. 
 
 
Following consideration of the Report of Mr. D Houston, Senior Planner on the 
 
matter, and on the proposal of Cllr. A. Browne, seconded by Cllr. J. O’Rourke, the 
 
Council resolved to  amend the Record of Protected Structures to include Bellview 
 
Famine Wall on lands at Ballyhogue, Bree, Co. Wexford.  
 
 
It was agreed that the Planning Authority would also examine the possibility of 
 
adding 2 local gate lodges in the Ballyhogue area to the Record of Protected 
 
Structures. 
 
 
Following conclusion of this discussion, Cllr. Byrne rejoined the meeting. 
 
  
7. Report Community Defibrillator Programme  
 
The Members noted the Report as circulated. Ms. C. Godkin A/DoS advised that the 
Council was not in a position to carry out works of maintenance or repair to 
defibrillators across the county. 
 
 
8. Social Housing - Update 2020  
 
Ms. C. Godkin presented the Report as circulated and responded to queries from the 
Members on a range of housing issues including the following: 
 
o Anti-social behavior 
o Repairs to void properties 
o Re-letting of vacant properties and associated costs 
o Traveller accommodation programme 
o Provision of affordable accommodation 
o Private rented inspections 
o Covid 19 - impact on repairs programme 
o Housing targets for 2020 
o Homeless services 
o Re-letting obligations of Council following tenancy surrender 
o Conducting repairs where property temporarily vacated 
o Conduction of inspections for grant purposes 
o Funding for Planned Maintenance 
o Emergency housing arrangements during severe weather 
 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
It was agreed that the Council would convene a Special Meeting early in the New Year 
to discuss Housing issues. 
 
 
9. Choice Based Letting Report 
 
Ms. C. Godkin presented the Report as circulated. The Members welcomed the 
proposal and asked that efforts be made to make the properties in question viewable 
on-line. 
 
 
 
10. Section 199/200 of the Local Government Act 2001 - Consideration of the 
Wexford County Council Draft Burial Ground Byelaws 2020 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. W. Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr. G. Lawlor, the Council 
resolved to approve the draft Burial Ground Byelaws 2020 for public consultation 
purposes. 
 
 
11. Proposed nomination of Mary Browne Sinnott as Business Pillar representative 
to LCDC replacing Madeline Quirke.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Whelan, seconded by Cllr. J. Owens, the Council resolved 
to approve the nomination of Ms. Mary Browne Sinnott as Business Pillar 
representative to LCDC 
 
 
12. Proposed nomination of Michael Wall as representative to the Housing & 
Community SPC replacing Ms. Clair Walsh.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Laffan, seconded by Cllr. J. Hegarty, the Council resolved to 
approve the nomination of Mr. Michael Wall as Trade Union Representative to the 
Housing and Community Strategic Policy Committee 
 
 
13. Chief Executive’s Report – November 2020 
 
Mr. T. Enright CE presented the Report as circulated and together with the other 
members of the Management Team responded to queries from the Members on a 
range of issues including the following: 
 
 Enniscorthy Flood Relief Scheme 
 Wexford Town Allotments 
 Septic Tank Inspections 
 Heritage Officer appointment 
 Development of St Waleran’s lands, Gorey 
 Removal of oil tanks from New Ross quayside 
 Development of High Hill New Ross 
 Assessment of Housing Needs 
 Public lighting upgrades 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 Development of New Ross Fire Station 
 New Ross Advance Factory project 
 Litter / Dumping – and associated surveys 
 Keep Wexford Beautiful Competition 
 Slipway charges 
 Trading opportunities in public amenities and open spaces 
 Public lighting at Ballycarney 
 Duncannon Pontoon 
 Slaney Search & Rescue – provision of pontoon 
 Environment Rapid Response programme 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the Council that he had received the prescribed notification 
from the Chief Executive in accordance with Section 147 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) of Mr. Enright’s decision to extend his tenure as Chief Executive of 
Wexford County Council for a period of 3 years. The Cathaoirleach added that he had 
notified the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government and the Public 
Appointments Service in accordance with the prescribed legislation. 
 
The members joined in welcoming Mr. Enright’s decision and they congratulated the 
Chief Executive on his continuing ambition for and outstanding contribution to the 
county. 
 
Mr. Enright thanked the Members for their kind comments and assured them of his 
continued efforts for County Wexford. 
 
 
14. Report of Corporate Policy Group  
 
14.1 CPG Meeting 5th October, 2020 
14.2 CPG Meeting 2nd November, 2020  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Lawlor, seconded by Cllr. D. Hynes, the minutes of the 
above meetings were adopted by the Council. 
 
Cllr. Hegarty requested that his attendance at the CPG meeting of 2 November 2020 
be noted in the minutes of that meeting. 
 
 
15. Minutes of Meetings 
  
15.1 Borough District of Wexford Meeting 20.07.2020 
 
15.2 Rosslare Municipal District Meeting 20.07.2020 
15.3 Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting 21.07.2020 
 
15.4 New Ross Municipal District Meeting 08.07.2020 
 
15.5 Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting 20.07.2020 
 
 
The Members noted the Minutes of the above meetings 
 
 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
16. Correspondence and Communications 
 
16.1  
Letter from Kildare County Council dated 10th September, 2020 
16.2  
Letter from Sligo County Council dated 14th September. 2020 
16.3  
Letter from Meath County Council dated 7th October, 2020 
 
The Members noted the above correspondence and on the proposal of Cllr. M.  
Whelan, seconded by Cllr. C. Byrne agreed that the Council would write to the 
relevant Ministers in support of the Motion from Sligo County Council. 
 
 
17. Notices of Motion 
 
17.1 Deferred Motion -  Cllr. T. Forde 
"I ask that Wexford County Council work to introduce a Choice Based Letting Scheme 
in 2020 which would allow housing applicants to express an interest in a property that 
matches their needs in any area. 
The scheme is being successfully used by other Local Authorities at present and was 
included in the Government Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness (2016)”. 
Cllr. Forde introduced the Motion and declared that he was satisfied at the manner in 
which the Council had responded to this request. 
 
17.2 Cllr. M. Sheehan 
 
“While understanding the need for a rigid defence against Covid, there is a growing 
acceptance of the impact the restrictions have had on maternity services and in 
particular peoples’ mental health.  While accepting there is a need to rebalance Covid 
19/ Public Heath Safety Measures with expectant families accessing Health Services; 
this Council calls on the Government, the HSE and NPHET to review and amend the 
Maternity Service regulations  to permit women accessing maternity medical services 
or appointments be accompanied by a family member or companion for their 
consultation/ service.  “ 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. C. Byrne and agreed. 
 
 
17.3 Cllr. J. Owens 
 
“That the Residents of Nos 1 to 11 New Range, Templeshannon, Enniscorthy be 
granted use of the grounds at the back of the properties for use as allotments”.     
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Owens, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne and agreed. 
 
Mr. T. Larkin DoS advised the meeting that he has commenced the process of putting 
Mr. Owens’ request into effect and would consider how best the lands in question 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
(some of which are unregistered) could be disposed of in partnership with the residents 
of the area. 
 
 
17.4 Cllr. M. Farrell 
 
“I propose that this Council write to Minister Roderic O’Gorman to call for his 
Department to implement and support the right to a Personal Assistance Service (PAS) 
for disabled people to have freedom, choice and control over all aspects of their lives to 
enable them to fully participate in an inclusive society as equals. 
 
The Motion passed in Dáil Eireann on the 19th November 2019 affirms that PAS that 
supports disabled people to live independent lives should be legislated for as a right.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Farrell, seconded by Cllr. M. Whelan and agreed. 
 
 
17.5 Cllr. T. Forde 
 
"I ask that this Council write to the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
and request that he attend (physically or virtually) the next meeting of Wexford County 
Council to address the crisis in housing faced by our local authority." 
 
Cllr. Forde proposed the Motion and spoke on it briefly.  
 
Mr. Enright advised the meeting that that the Minister had very recently met with Ms. C. 
Godkin A/DoS and the Chief Executive to discuss housing issues in Wexford and he 
also noted the intention of the Council to hold a Special Meeting in the near future to 
discuss Housing matters. 
 
Mr. Enright suggested that the proposed meeting with the Minister be postponed until 
the Special Housing Meeting had concluded and any items identified at that meeting for 
discussion could be raised with the Minister. This was agreed. 
 
 
17.6 Cllr. J. Fleming 
 
“I am calling on Wexford County Council to paint all disability car parking spaces blue 
for the purposes of clarity so that there cannot be any confusion as the space is clearly 
marked blue for disability parking only. “ 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Fleming, seconded by Cllr. M. Whelan and agreed. 
 
 
17.7 Cllr. G. Carthy  
“Cllr Ger Carthy calls on Wexford County Council to allow Wexford County Fire Service 
participate in the fire co responder scheme.”  
Proposed by Cllr. G. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. J. Owens and agreed. 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
17.8 Cllr. C. Byrne 
"Wexford County Council write to the Minister for Transport to provide a road map to 
address the current wait times for Driving Tests." 
 
Following discussion, it was agreed to amend the motion by inserting the words “as a 
matter of urgency” after the word “map”.  
 
The amended Motion was proposed by Cllr. C. Byrne, seconded by Cllr. K. Codd Nolan 
and agreed. 
 
 
17.9 Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin 
 
"This council acknowledges the problem of homelessness in this county and those 
forced to sleep rough, especially during these winter months. That we will re-establish 
some form of emergency accommodation for those who may need it in North Wexford, 
as existed up until two years ago." 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. O’Súilleabháin, seconded by Cllr. J. Sullivan and agreed. 
 
 
17.10 Cllr. D. Hynes 
 
“Many applicants who received approval for the Rebuilding Ireland Home  are now 
through no fault of their own finding a major problem drawing down the mortgage 
because they may be receiving PUP due to the Covid Lockdown. The Minister of the 
Dept of the Environment etc needs to address this urgently.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr. D. Hynes, seconded by Cllr. L. McDonald and agreed. 
 
 
17.11 Cllr. D. Hynes & Cllr. F. Ó Súilleabháin 
 
“In light of the number of recent deaths of people experiencing homelessness, we ask 
that Wexford County Council reinstate/create an out of hours council contact service to 
support those experiencing homelessness. This could assist homeless individuals, and 
councillors and local groups as their advocates, in dealing with emergency situations 
and in accessing emergency accommodation.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr. D. Hynes, seconded by Cllr. F. O’Súilleabháin and agreed 
 
18.  Any Other Business  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach invited the Chief Executive to make some final comments. Mr. 
Enright thanked the elected members for their cooperation in facilitating the first fully 
remote meeting of the Council and paid tribute to the Council’s IT staff for their work in 
arranging the meeting. 
 

County Council Meeting 9.11.20 
 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
He added that a number of significant projects, supported by Wexford County Council 
were progressing across the county: 
 
Opening of Wexford Rape Crisis Centre 
Further funding announced for New Ross to Waterford Greenway 
Announcement by CSC of 75 jobs in Gorey 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach and elected Members recorded their congratulations to the 
following: 
 
 Rosslare and Fethard RNLI, following a successful rescue off the South East 
coast 
 
 American President elect Mr. Joe Biden and American Vice-President elect Ms. 
Kamela Harris 
 
 The Starlights GAA team, following their recent County Final success 
 
 Joseph O’Brien and his father Aidan, following a 1-2 success in the Melbourne 
Cup 
 
The Cathaoirleach and elected Members also offered their sympathies to the 
Donoghue Family and Stafford Family, following the recent passing of Mr. Jim 
Donohoe of Ferns and Mr. Sean Stafford, Gorey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an 14ú lá de  Nollag, 2020. 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
________________________ 
County Secretary 
