County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 1 of 13 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
Minutes of Meeting of Wexford County Council Held on Monday 8th June, 2026 in the 
Council Chamber at 2.30pm (with some remote attendance) 
Attendance: 
In the Chair: Cllr. Joe Sullivan, Cathaoirleach. 
Councillors: 
Barden 
 
Pat 
(Online) 
Farrell 
Mary 
Murphy 
Bridín 
 
Barron 
Vicky 
 
Fleming 
John 
Murphy 
Marty 
 
Boland 
 
Nicky 
 
Forde 
 
Tom 
 
O’Brien 
Aoife Rose 
 
Breen 
Pip 
 
Kavanagh 
Paddy 
O’Rourke 
John 
 
Browne 
Aidan 
Kehoe 
Pat 
Owens 
Jackser 
 
Byrne 
Patricia 
Kelly 
Leonard 
(Online) 
Shannon 
Raymond 
Carthy 
Ger 
 
Kenny 
Donal 
 
Sheehan 
Michael 
 
Codd 
Jim 
Laffan 
Garry 
Staples 
Frank 
 
Donohoe 
Anthony 
McDonald 
Darragh 
 
Staples 
Robbie 
 
Doyle 
 
Craig 
 
McDonald 
Lisa 
 
Walsh 
Catherine 
Dwyer 
John 
(Online) 
Murphy 
Barbara-Anne 
 
Walsh 
Oliver 
 
 
Officials: 
Mr. Seamus Begley, A/Director of Finance 
Mr. Michael Drea, County Secretary 
Ms. Carolyne Godkin, Director of Services 
Mr. Eamonn Hore, Director of Services 
Mr. Diarmuid Houston, A/Director of Services 
Mr. Alan Quirke, Director of Services 
Mr. Eddie Taaffe, Chief Executive 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 2 of 13 
 
Apologies: Ms. Liz Hore, Director of Services, Ms. Lynda Lacey, Director of Finance 
Votes of sympathy: 
The Cathaoirleach offered the sympathy of the Council to: 
• The family of Amy Heffernan, IT Section. 
• The family of Brigid Carton, mother of Alan Carton, Machinery Yard, Enniscorthy. 
• The family of Patrick Francis (Fran) Breen, Former Employee, Enniscorthy Municipal 
District. 
• The family of John Ralph, brother of Mairin Ralph, retired staff member and uncle of 
Rory O’Neill, Planning Department. 
• The family of Bridget Moran, mother of Aishling Doyle, Credit Control, and sister-in-
law of Catriona O’Sullivan, Arts Department. 
• The family Fintan O’Neill, father of Alan O’Neill, Chief Fire Officer. 
• The family of Eileen Chapman (née Moran), mother of Christine Hanlon, HR Section. 
• The family of Vinnie O’Sullivan, The Shop, Weafer Street, Enniscorthy, Wexford. 
• The family of Sean O'Rourke, 22 Ross Road, Enniscorthy, Wexford, uncle of Cllr. John 
O’Rourke.  
• The family of Anne O'Rourke (née Lacey), 11 Fr. Murphy Park, Enniscorthy, Wexford, 
aunt in law of Cllr. John O’Rourke.  
• The family of John Corish, Redshire Road, Murrintown, Wexford. 
• The family of Pat Nolan, McMurragh Court, Bosheen, New Ross, Co. Wexford. 
• The family of Helen Deegan, Parkfield, New Ross, Co. Wexford. 
• The family of Geraldine Geoghegan, Ard-Na-Gréine, New Ross, Co. Wexford. 
Congratulations: 
• Cathaoirleach Cllr. J. Sullivan congratulated Gorey Rangers on winning the Wexford 
Premier Division title and nine other adult titles this year. 
• Cllr. V. Barron congratulated the Rape Crisis Centre on their Midsummer Ladies Lunch 
fundraiser. 
• Cllr. J. Owens congratulated Paul Nolan on training three winners at the recent 
meeting at Wexford racecourse. 
• Cllr. J. Owens congratulated Enniscorthy Utd. on their promotion to the Premier 
Division. 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 3 of 13 
 
• Cllr. J. Owens congratulated the Irish Senior Ladies Football team on their recent 
World Cup qualifier defeat of the Netherlands. 
• Cllr. J. Codd congratulated Rebecca Whitty, Kamila Demyter and Ana Nistor who are 
the founders of Rare Warriors Wexford on their recent fundraiser and the great work 
they do. 
• Cllr. J. Codd congratulated the Wexford indie band The Wires who secured a slot to 
play Electric Picnic by winning a local Battle of the Bands competition. 
• Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated Aidan O’Brien who trained Christmas Day to win his 
12th Derby at Epsom. 
• Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated all the recent County Wexford Business Award winners. 
• Cllr. J. Fleming congratulated Ger Rochford who was an award winner at the Marks & 
Spencer’s Farming for the Future event. 
• Cllr.’s A. Browne, J. Owens, and P. Barden congratulated Cllr. N. Boland on his highly 
successful football refereeing career following his recent retirement. 
• Cllr. P. Barden congratulated the Wexford footballers who claimed a Tailteann Cup 
quarter-final spot after defeating Leitrim. 
• Cllr.’s M. Sheehan and J. Dwyer congratulated the organisers of the recent AIMS 
Choral Festival in New Ross. 
• Cllr. M. Sheehan congratulated Mick McCormack, Eamonn Hore, and Eddie Taaffe on 
the recent national Town Regeneration Officer event held in New Ross. 
• Cllr. G. Laffan congratulated the HFC Concert Band on their centenary celebrations in 
Wexford. 
• Cathaoirleach Cllr. J. Sullivan congratulated Tony Dempsey on being inducted into the 
Leinster GAA Hall of Fame for his outstanding service to the GAA as an administrator, 
team manager, trainer, and educator. 
• Cllr. J. O’Rourke congratulated Eamon Furlong who refereed the Joe McDonagh Cup 
Final and James Owens who refereed the Munster Senior Hurling Final. 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. J. Sullivan welcomed Mr. Aidan Delaney who has recently taken up a 
role with South East Radio. 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
1.1 County Council Meeting 11th May, 2026 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. J. O’Rourke the Council resolved to 
confirm the minutes of the County Council Meeting on 11th May, 2026. 
1.2 County Council Meeting 9th March, 2026 
On the proposal of Cllr. V. Barron, seconded by Cllr. J. O’Rourke the Council resolved to 
confirm the minutes of the County Council Meeting on 9th March, 2026. 
Matters Arising: 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 4 of 13 
 
Cllr. V. Barron sought an update on the provision of training on Domestic, Sexual, and 
Gender-Based Violence (DSGBV) for all elected members. This was on foot on a motion 
which was proposed by Cllr.’s V. Barron and B. Murphy and agreed by all at the July 2025 
Plenary Meeting. Mr. E. Taaffe advised that the intention is to run the training, the 
challenge is securing a trainer with the requisite breadth of expertise. 
1.3 County Council Meeting 13th April, 2026 
These minutes were adopted at the May Plenary meeting. 
2. Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001: 
 2.1 Intention to dispose of property known as Sawyers Pub, Shannon Quay, Enniscorthy, 
Co. Wexford.  
 On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne the Council resolved to 
dispose of a property known as Sawyers Pub, Shannon Quay, Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford in 
accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated. 
 2.2 Intention to dispose of property known as The Old House Pub, 6 Templeshannon, 
Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford. 
 On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. A. Browne the Council resolved to 
dispose of a property known as The Old House Pub, 6 Templeshannon, Enniscorthy, Co. 
Wexford in accordance with the terms set out in the S.183 Notice as circulated. 
3. Part XVI of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended): 
 
3.1 
EL 0039 - The Gorey Market House Festival is a 3-day event on Gorey’s Main Street 
and other venues around Gorey. The music event on the Main Street is one event in 
a wider package of events forming the festival and that only the music event on the 
Main Street requires the event licence due to numbers – Main Street, Gorey, Co. 
Wexford.  
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. P. 
Breen, seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny, the Council resolved to approve the Part XVI to 
grant an event licence for the music event on Main Street, Gorey, Co. Wexford as 
part of the Gorey Market House Festival. 
4. Part XI of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations, 2001 (as amended) 
 
4.1       LAC2603 - Development of a greenway trailhead and recreational facility at 
Rosbercon, New Ross, Co. Wexford.  
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, 
seconded by Cllr. J. Fleming, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for the 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 5 of 13 
 
development of a greenway trailhead and recreational facility at Rosbercon, New Ross, 
Co. Wexford in accordance with the terms of LAC2603, as circulated. 
4.2       LAC2604 - Proposed Beechlawn Road and Clonard Avenue Pedestrian and Cycle 
Scheme. 
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. L. Kelly, 
seconded by Cllr. G. Laffan, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for the proposed 
Beechlawn Road and Clonard Avenue Pedestrian and Cycle Scheme in accordance with 
the terms of LAC2604, as circulated. 
There was a lengthy discussion on this matter with safety concerns expressed in relation 
to contra flow cycle lanes and the crossing of traffic. Mr. E. Taaffe advised that the project 
will be subject to an independent safety audit before and after the works. Cllr. G. Carty 
proposed a presentation on current and proposed active travel plans for the county, 
which was seconded by Cllr. L. McDonald. 
4.3       LAC2605 – Development of changing rooms facility with associated site works at 
Enniscorthy Astro Pitch, Ross Road, Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford. 
Having considered the report of the Chief Executive, on the proposal of Cllr. A. Browne, 
seconded by Cllr. B.A. Murphy, the Council resolved to approve the Part 8 for the 
development of changing rooms facility with associated site works at Enniscorthy Astro 
Pitch, Ross Road, Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford in accordance with the terms of LAC2605, as 
circulated. 
5. ACP-324230-26. Section 291 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended. 
Response to An Coimisiún Pleanála for development in the Maritime Area. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr. M. Sheehan, the Council resolved 
to approve the response as circulated without additional comments to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála for development in the maritime area pertaining to the proposed installation of 
the Beaufort sub-sea fibre optic cable system from the terminus of works under the 
granted Foreshore Licence [FS007361] at the 12 nautical mile (nM) limit to the extent of 
the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) off the coast of Kilmore Quay, Co. Wexford. 
 
6. PPN Sectoral Nomination to Strategic Policy Committee 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Sheehan, seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell, the Council resolved to 
appoint Mr. Seamus Murphy as the PPN Community/Voluntary sectoral interest to the 
Economic Development & Enterprise SPC. 
 
7. Replacement of CIF Representative on Housing Strategic Policy Committee 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 6 of 13 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. G. Carthy, seconded by Cllr. J. Codd, the Council resolved to 
appoint Mr. Douglas Taylor as the CIF sectoral interest to the Housing SPC replacing Mr. 
Daniel Nichol, who has stepped down. 
8. Letter of Invitation to "One Festival, Two Countries International Festival", Danville, 
California, 10th September - 15th September, 2026 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Fleming, seconded by Cllr. B. Murphy, the Council resolved to 
send a delegation to the One Festival, Two Countries International Festival in Danville, 
California in September. 
 
9. Q1 2026 Annual Service Delivery Plan Progress Report - For Noting 
 
The members noted the Q1 2026 Annual Service Delivery Plan Progress Report. 
 
10. 2025 Annual Report - For Adoption 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. O’Rourke, seconded by Cllr. M. Sheehan, the Council resolved to 
adopt the 2025 annual report. 
 
11. Climate Action Charter - For Noting 
 
The members noted the Climate Action Charter. 
 
12. Chief Executive’s Report 
 
Mr. E. Taaffe advised that officials will not discuss personal details at Council meetings, 
particularly in relation to housing matters, and therefore councillors may, at times, have 
only partial information available to them. He further referenced a recent incident in 
which a staff member was subjected to unacceptable and offensive commentary on social 
media and reminded members of his duty of care to staff. Councillors were asked to be 
mindful of this in their contributions. 
The Chief Executive and members of the Management Team responded to a wide range 
of queries from the Elected Members regarding the following:  
• Cllr. G. Carthy thanked the housing staff, acknowledging that they do their best for 
difficult cases.  
• Does Wexford County Council’s tenant handbook apply to Cluid and other AHB’s? If so, 
can it be enforced to deal with issues in Roxborough? 
• The increase in disability grant funding was welcomed and considering the increased 
funding how is the scheme progressing? 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 7 of 13 
 
• The issue of dampness in a Tuath house and the delay in carrying out repairs to a Cluid 
house was raised. It was queried if Wexford County Council can intervene to assist. 
• The housing staff were complimented. 
• How many 4 beds in the Lyre housing scheme units that Wexford County Council is 
acquiring? 
• What is the status of the Turret Rocks housing development? 
• Query if a housing applicant can have dual housing need for homelessness and 
medical needs? Observation that housing applicants with complex needs must be 
treated differently. 
• The timeline for the allocation of a property to an 80-year-old woman was queried. 
• Query if housing grants forms can be certified by someone other than a doctor as 
there is often a delay in getting them completed and there is a cost. It was suggested if 
this isn’t permitted, a letter should be sent to the Minister requesting a change. 
• Has there been any engagement from Respond in relation to the Mercy convent? 
• The Director of Services and housing staff were thanked for their response to anti-
social behaviour reports in an estate in New Ross. 
• Stephen O’Connor and Michele Bridges Carley were thanked for their quick response 
in providing accommodation for an elderly man whose property burnt down. 
• Does Wexford County Council have many derelict properties? The Council was urged 
to decide what to do with these properties. 
• There was a request to step up proceedings against a tenant who is engaging in anti-
social behaviour and has ignored warnings from the Council. 
• There was a request that Wexford County Council facilitate tenants seeking to 
downsize. 
• Housing staff involved in affordable housing were congratulated. 
• Confirmation sought that Wexford County Council won’t send tenancy warning letters 
to those in homeless accommodation who aren’t doing anything wrong. 
• The Director of Services for Housing was complimented for Wexford County Council’s 
increased engagement with the Cornmarket Project. 
• Request for greater involvement of social work staff with tenants who are impacted by 
drug use. 
• Request that the Council move quicker in dealing with derelict properties. 
 
The meeting adjourned for a comfort break at this point.   
 
• Update sought on works at Clohamon and Ballycarney junctions. 
• Update sought on when the filter lane will be created on the road leading from the 
Whitford roundabout to the Newtown roundabout. The filter lane will be for vehicles 
exiting towards New Ross. 
• Request that the road beside the Memorial garden in Kilmore be repaired. 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 8 of 13 
 
• Request that road junctions be cut back for safety reasons considering the significant 
growth. 
• Update sought on the relining of the Whitford, Rosslare, and Newtown roundabouts. 
• Can the trees which are hanging down on the R730 road be dealt with? 
• Can another lane be added on the left-hand side as you exit of the Heritage Park 
junction? 
• Can the inside lane on the Scarawalsh roundabout be designated as a filter lane for the 
N80? 
• Request that bus stops be installed in Bunclody. 
• Frustration expressed at road being closed for 7 hours in Bunclody by Uisce Éireann 
without the Council’s knowledge.  
• The impending safety audit at Glenbrook and the proposed meeting of consultants and 
residents was welcomed. 
• Update sought on safety audit in Wexford Borough MD. 
• Query if public health nurses using their own cars can be exempted from parking 
charges when carrying out their duties.  
• The Director of Services was thanked for the installation of a bus shelter in Campile 
and one was requested for Newbawn. 
• Request that the junction at JCE Tyres in New Ross be reviewed. 
• Update sought on New Ross active travel proposals. 
• Reduction in speed limit on Camblin Hill was requested. 
• Request that the junction at Kilgarvan graveyard be upgraded. 
• Request that TII hardcore areas where commuters are parking their cars at entry 
points to the motorway. Finchogue was given as one such example. 
• Query if the site for 65 social and 45 affordable units in Bunclody is back under the 
Council’s control? Will the 65 units be phased? Can any of the 45 units be affordable 
sites? What will the composition of the housing be? 
• Update sought on Trinity Wharf? 
• Update sought on the Wexford Flood Relief scheme. 
• Query why there isn’t a beach warden for Morriscastle beach and request that one be 
provided. 
• Why weren’t overflow car parks at beaches open for the last bank holiday weekend? 
• Can a hoist be provided at beach locations where there is a beach wheelchair in use? 
• View expressed that the Eir exchange buildings need to be maintained better. 
• Why is the old Loretto school not on the derelict sites register? 
• Update sought on future plans for site at Clonard Little. 
• Request for action on four derelict properties in Cluain Dara for the past 20 years. 
• When will variation for increased housing supply for Bunclody go on public display? 
• The urgent need for the upgrade of the bridge at the Signa Care residential facility in 
Bunclody was raised. 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 9 of 13 
 
• How does Wexford County Council deal with planning site notices which are located 
outside of the site boundary? 
 
13. Minutes of CPG Meeting 2nd June, 2026 
 
13.1 Minutes of CPG Meeting 2nd June, 2026 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonald, the Council resolved 
to confirm the minutes of the CPG Meeting on 2nd June, 2026. 
 
14. Minutes of Meetings (For Noting) 
14.1    Gorey-Kilmuckridge Municipal District Meeting – 21st April, 2026 
14.2    New Ross Municipal District Meeting – 8th April, 2026 
14.3    New Ross Municipal District Meeting Special – 20th April, 2026 
14.4    Borough District of Wexford Meeting –  20th April, 2026 
14.5    Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting – 21st April, 2026 
14.6    Enniscorthy Municipal District Meeting Special– 16th April, 2026 
14.7    Rosslare Municipal District Meeting – 15th April, 2026The Members noted the 
minutes, as circulated. 
The Members noted the minutes, as circulated. 
15. Correspondence and Communications 
15.1    Letter from Clare County Council re: motion dated 12th May, 2026 
15.2    Letter from Cavan County Council re: motion dated 14th May, 2026       
15.3    Letter from Longford County Council re: motion dated 18th May, 2026 
15.4    Letter from Galway County Council re: motion dated 28th May, 2026 
The Members noted the correspondence, as circulated.  
16. Councillor’s Conferences and Training 
16.1  Delegation Report 
KIMO - May 2026 
The Members noted the delegation report, as circulated. 
 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 10 of 13 
 
17. Notices of Motion 
 
17.1    Cllr. J. Sullivan 
"This council namely Wexford County Council calls on Regnum Renewables to withdraw 
their proposal for "Kilmichael Windfarm" in the townslands of Mount Nebo, Craan Upper, 
Slievebawn, Monaseed Demense and Kilmichael Gorey due to the overwhelming 
opposition to the project by the residents of the aforementioned areas." 
 
The motion was proposed by Cllr. J. Sullivan and seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny. 
 
Cllr. J. Sullivan introduced the motion calling on Regnum Renewables to withdraw their 
proposal for the “Kilmichael Windfarm” due to what he described as overwhelming local 
opposition. He outlined the scale of the proposed turbines and their proximity to 
approximately 360 houses within a 2km radius. He emphasised that there is no 
opposition to renewable energy in principle, but significant concern regarding the 
location and scale of this development.  
 
Cllr. O. Walsh advised that he had voted against a similar motion at the Gorey 
Kilmuckridge Municipal District and stated that it was important for Councillors to 
recognise their role within the planning process. He noted that the County Development 
Plan, approved by 33 of 34 Councillors, sets out the areas suitable for wind energy 
development and that the lands referenced in the motion are not included. He further 
stated that, as a Planning Authority, he could not support issuing a letter requesting a 
developer not to submit a planning application and noted that a letter may already have 
issued from the Gorey Kilmuckridge Municipal District. 
 
Cllr.’s T. Forde and A.R. O’Brien stated that the matter was one for the Municipal District 
members to determine, while acknowledging the importance of renewable energy. 
Cllrs. G. Laffan, L. McDonald, and B.A. Murphy indicated that they were not in a position 
to support the motion. Cllr. P. Breen indicated that he would abstain. 
 
Cllrs. M. Murphy, J. Codd, N. Boland, D. Kenny, and P. Barden indicated their support for 
the motion.  
 
Cllr. P. Kehoe emphasised that the matter falls to the planning process and An Coimisiún 
Pleanála. 
 
In response, Cllr. J. Sullivan reiterated that the intent of the motion was not to influence 
the planning process but to request that Regnum Renewables not proceed with a 
planning application. 
 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 11 of 13 
 
Chief Executive, Mr. E. Taaffe, advised that he had previously met with representatives of 
Regnum Renewables and had directed them to the County Development Plan. He also 
confirmed that he had met with local residents and that, should a planning application be 
submitted, it would likely be made directly to An Coimisiún Pleanála as a Strategic 
Infrastructure Development. He outlined that, in such circumstances, the Chief Executive 
would prepare a report on behalf of the Council, to which members could append 
comments but could not amend his report. He emphasised that any party with a legal 
interest in land has the right to submit a planning application and that requesting 
otherwise would set an unwise precedent. 
 
Following the discussion, Cllr. J. Sullivan proposed to withdraw the motion, which was 
agreed on a show of hands. 
 
17.2  Cllr. R. Staples 
“Wexford County Council calls on the Minister for Transport to implement the road 
maintenance catch-up fund for local authorities as committed to in the Programme for 
Government. We note that we are now 18 months into the Programme, yet Wexford 
County Council has not received any catch-up funding to date, despite allocating 
significant local resources to maintain and repair our road network. This lack of national 
support has left the Council unable to address the scale of deterioration on many regional 
and local roads. The catch-up fund must be delivered as part of Budget 2027 to ensure 
that counties like Wexford are not left behind. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. R. Staples, seconded by Cllr. B. Murphy, and agreed by all, the 
motion was carried. 
 
17.3  Cllr. J. Fleming 
“I am calling on the minister for housing as to when they fund Approved housing bodies 
to ad a caveat that when the Approved housing bodies purchase a property for rental 
purposes that there is a time limit of (2 years attached for the following reason (2 years to 
allow time for renovations etc) if occupation has not started during those 2 years the 
Approved Housing body is compelled to return the Government funding in full.” 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Fleming, seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny, and agreed by all, the 
motion was carried. 
 
 
17.4 Cllr. B.A. Murphy & Cllr. D. Kenny 
“Wexford Co. Council calls on the telecommunications company Eir to clarify that their 
maintenance responsibility regarding public infrastructure includes all the telegraph poles 
and lines in the country. 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 12 of 13 
 
I ask Wexford Co. Council to write to the Minister for Communications and to the Chair of 
the Oireachtas Committee on Communications to convene a meeting to discuss the 
regulation of this area of critical communications infrastructure with Eir and to get a 
commitment that broken telegraph poles will be replaced within 48 hours.” 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. B.A. Murphy, seconded by Cllr. D. Kenny, and agreed by all, the 
motion was carried. 
 
17.5   Cllr. A.R. O'Brien 
"Wexford County Council calls on the Minister for Education and Youth and the 
Department of Education to fully resource and provide a qualified school therapist in 
every primary and secondary school, ensuring that children and young people 
experiencing mental health difficulties have timely access to professional support within 
their school community. 
 This council further calls for increased investment in school-based mental health services 
to ensure that all children have access to essential supports during periods of emotional 
or psychological distress." 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. A.R. O’Brien, seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell, and agreed by all, the 
motion was carried. 
 
17.6  Cllr. T. Forde 
"I ask that Wexford County Council establish a “Made of Wexford” Award Scheme, 
modelled on successful place-based recognition initiatives such as “Made of Athy”, to 
celebrate and promote individuals, businesses, organisations, products, cultural 
contributions and achievements that embody the spirit, talent, innovation and identity of 
County Wexford. 
The award scheme would aim to recognise excellence and strengthen pride in Wexford’s 
communities, heritage, enterprise and creativity, while also supporting tourism, local 
enterprise and civic identity. The Council is requested to examine the structure, criteria 
and implementation of such a programme and report back on its feasibility." 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. C. Doyle, and agreed by all, the motion 
was carried. 
 
18. A.O.B. 
On the proposal of Cllr. V. Barron, seconded by Cllr. C. Doyle, the Council resolved to 
approve the Women in Politics and Wellbeing Conference on 17th & 18th June in the 
Radisson Red Hotel, Galway. 
 

County Council Meeting 08.06.26 
 
Page 13 of 13 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUISINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Iúil, 2026. 
 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr. Lisa McDonald 
 
 
 
 
Michael Drea,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
