Special County Council Meeting 16.12.24 
 
Page 1 of 3 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Wexford County Council Held Monday 16th December 2024 
 in the Council Chamber at 12.00pm (with some remote attendance) 
 
Attendance: 
 
In the Chair:  
Cllr. Pip Breen, Cathaoirleach. 
 
Councillors: 
 
 
 
Boland 
Nicky 
(Online) 
Kenny 
Donal 
 
Staples 
Robbie 
(Online) 
Byrne 
 
Cathal 
Laffan 
Garry 
 
Sullivan 
Joe 
 
Carthy 
Ger 
McDonald 
Darragh 
(Online) 
Walsh 
Catherine Biddy 
(Online) 
Codd 
Jim 
 
McDonald 
Lisa 
(Online) 
Walsh 
 Oliver 
 
Donohoe 
Anthony 
(Online) 
Murphy 
Barbara-Anne 
(Online) 
Dwyer 
John 
(Online) 
Murphy 
Bridín 
(Online) 
Fleming 
John 
O’Brien 
Aoife Rose 
 
Forde  
Tom 
O’Rourke 
John 
 
Kavanagh 
Paddy 
 
Shannon 
Raymond 
Kehoe 
Pat 
 
Sheehan 
Michael 
Kelly 
Leonard 
(Online) 
Staples 
Frank  
(Online) 
 
Officials: 
 
 
Ms. A. Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. M. Drea, County Secretary 
Ms. C. Godkin, Director of Services 
Mr. E. Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. L. Hore, Director of Services 
Mr. Shay Howell, A/Director of Services 
Mr. E. Taaffe, Chief Executive 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Aidan Browne, Mary Farrell, Jackser Owens, Ms. Lynda Lacey, Director of Finance 
 
 
 
 
 

Special County Council Meeting 16.12.24 
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. P. Breen began by welcoming Deputy’s J. Mythen, F. Ó Súilleabháin, and 
G. Lawlor, and former Deputy B. Howlin. Cllr. Breen congratulated former Councillors George 
Lawlor and Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin on their election to Dáil Éireann. Cllr.’s G. Carthy, T. 
Forde, J. Codd, M. Sheehan, C. Walsh, J. Sullivan, O. Walsh, A.R. O’Brien, R. Shannon, P. 
Kavanagh and L. Kelly joined the Cathaoirleach in congratulating George Lawlor and Fionntán 
Ó Súilleabháin on their election. 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. P. Breen extended his best wishes to Vicky Barron and Craig Doyle, the 
nominees for co-option to fill the casual vacancies. Cllr.’s G. Carthy, T. Forde, J. Codd, M. 
Sheehan, C. Walsh, J. Sullivan, O. Walsh, A.R. O’Brien, R. Shannon, P. Kavanagh and L. Kelly 
joined the Cathaoirleach in offering their best wishes to Vicky Barron and Craig Doyle. 
 
Cllr. C. Walsh congratulated outgoing Deputy Brendan Howlin on his political career. Cllr.’s 
M. Sheehan, P. Kavanagh, and O. Walsh congratulated outgoing Deputy’s Brendan Howlin 
and Paul Kehoe on their outstanding service. Cllr.’s A.R. O’Brien and O. Walsh congratulated 
Johnny Mythen on his re-election to Dáil Éireann. 
 
Mr. E. Taaffe welcomed Deputy’s J. Mythen, F. Ó Súilleabháin, and G. Lawlor, and former 
Deputy B. Howlin. On behalf of the staff and senior management team Mr. Taaffe 
congratulated former Councillors G. Lawlor and F. Ó Súilleabháin on their election to Dáil 
Éireann. Mr. Taaffe welcomed Vicky Barron and Craig Doyle and said he looks forward to 
working with them. 
 
1. 
Filling of Casual Vacancy created by the election of George Lawlor to Dáil Éireann 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Walsh, seconded by Cllr. M. Sheehan, and agreed by all, Vicky 
Barron was co-opted to fill the casual vacancy created by George Lawlor’s election to Dáil 
Éireann in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
Cllr. C. Walsh said Vicky’s care and understanding of our communities most vulnerable, her 
passion for young people and the lives of their families and her drive to make a difference 
will make her a fine representative of the people of Wexford.  
 
Cllr. M. Sheehan said he was delighted to second Vicky’s nomination stating that she will 
bring a fresh approach and hit the ground running for the people of Wexford. 
 
Cllr. V. Barron thanked her proposer and seconder and said it is a wonderful opportunity to 
work with Cllr. Walsh whom she has a lot of experience working with. Cllr. Barron thanked 
George Lawlor for the opportunity to be co-opted and Brendan Howlin who was her 
inspiration to get involved in politics. 
 
Cllr. V. Barron thanked her mother Mary, father Tony, Sharon, Paul, and her husband Michael 
for all their support and said she is excited and looking forward to working with her new 
colleagues and the staff. Cllr. Barron finished by saying it is an honour and a privilege. 
 
2. 
Filling of Casual Vacancy created by the election of Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin to Dáil 
Éireann 
 

Special County Council Meeting 16.12.24 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. T. Forde, seconded by Cllr. A.R. O’Brien, and agreed by all, Craig Doyle 
was co-opted to fill the casual vacancy created by Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin’s election to Dáil 
Éireann in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
Cllr. T. Forde said he knows Craig as an activist, hard worker, and respected in his 
community. Cllr. Forde said he was delighted to nominate Craig who is now the youngest 
member of the Council. 
 
Cllr. A.R. O’Brien said she is delighted to no longer be the newest Councillor in the 
Chamber. Cllr. O’Brien said Craig will work hard and be a great addition to the Council. 
 
Cllr. C. Doyle thanked Seamus Davitt, Deputy Johnny Mythen, Deputy Fionntán Ó 
Súilleabháin, Cllr. Tom Forde, and Cllr. Aoife Rose O’Brien for their help and support. Cllr. 
Doyle said he looked forward to working with his fellow Councillors. 
 
Cllr.’s J. Fleming, O. Walsh, and J. Codd welcomed Cllr.’s Barron and Doyle onto the Council.  
 
Cllr. T. Forde welcomed Cllr. Barron and said he is looking forward to working alongside 
her. 
 
 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Eanáir, 2025. 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr. Pip Breen  
 
 
 
 
Michael Drea,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
 
