Special (Housing) County Council Meeting 08.01.24 
 
WEXFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Wexford County Council held on Monday 8th January 2024 in the Council 
Chamber at 11.30am (with some remote attendance via Microsoft Teams) 
Attendance: 
In the Chair: Cllr. John Fleming, Cathaoirleach 
Councillors: 
Barden 
Pat  
Farrell 
Mary 
(online) 
O’Rourke 
John 
(online) 
Bell 
Maura  
 
Hynes 
David  
Ó’Súilleabháin 
Fionntáin 
 
Bolger 
Andrew  
(online) 
Kavanagh 
Willie 
Owens 
Jackser 
 
Breen 
Pip 
Kelly 
Leonard 
(online) 
Sheehan 
Michael 
 
Browne 
Aidan 
Kenny 
Donal 
Staples 
Frank  
(online) 
Byrne 
Cathal 
Laffan 
Garry 
(online) 
Sullivan 
Joe 
 
Carthy 
Ger 
Lawlor  
George 
Walsh 
Oliver 
(online) 
Codd 
Jim 
 
McDonald 
Lisa 
Whelan 
Michael 
 
Connick 
Anthony  
(online) 
Moore 
Jim 
 
 
 
Devereux 
Diarmuid 
 
Murphy 
Barbara-
Anne 
 
 
Donohoe 
Anthony 
(online) 
Murphy 
Bridín 
 
 
 
 
Officials: 
Mr. Tom Enright, Chief Executive 
Mr. Eamonn Hore, Director of Services 
Ms. Lynda Lacey, A/Head of Finance 
Mr. Eddie Taaffe, Director of Services 
Ms. Elizabeth Hore, Director of Services  
Ms Carolyne Godkin, Director of Services 

Special (Housing) County Council Meeting 08.01.24 
 
Ms. Amanda Byrne, A/Director of Services 
Mr. Michael Drea, County Secretary 
Ms. Anita McLoughlin, A/Senior Executive Officer 
Mr. Shay Howell, A/Senior Architect 
Apologies:  
Cllr. Kathleen Codd Nolan, Cllr. Jackser Owens & Cllr. John Hegarty 
Mr. T. Enright outlined the Housing for All target to deliver 1,155 units within the lifetime of the plan, a 
target Mr. Enright advised Wexford County Council will far exceed. He detailed the 120 acres of land 
acquired in Wexford, 72 acres in Gorey, 11 acres in Enniscorthy and the potential to deliver significant units 
on these lands. Mr. Enright spoke of the importance to deliver social, affordable, and private housing 
within the County. He welcomed the opportunity presented by the Members to address a key priority for 
the Council. 
 
1. 
Housing For All Update 
Ms. A. McLoughlin outlined the breakdown of the Housing for All programme year by year and the 
distribution of social housing demand across the County. Ms. McLoughlin advised that 455 units 
have been delivered through turnkey, Part V and AHB’s in the period 2022 – 2023, a further 771 are 
under construction, and another 409 are approved.  
Ms. McLoughlin informed the Members that an Administrative Officer has been allocated to 
affordable housing to manage this delivery stream. An extended survey across the county will take 
place in January / February 2024 with a view to holding an Affordable Housing seminar for 
developers in February 2024. Ms. McLoughlin advised that affordable housing schemes are being 
developed for the Ramsfort Park, St. Walerans and Milehouse Road sites. She also indicated that 
there is interest from private developers in developing affordable housing as part of mixed tenure 
sites in New Ross, Rosslare and Wexford. 
Mr. E. Taaffe outlined his area of responsibility which is the delivery of social and affordable 
housing build on Wexford County Council owned land. He indicated that the Council will be actively 
pursuing additional land in the main towns. Mr. Taaffe advised that there will also be a focus on 
delivering smaller sites for special local needs. Mr. Taaffe said his unit are currently master planning 
the Milehouse Road, St. Walerans and Ballynagee sites, all of which will be mixed tenure 
developments.   
2. 
AHB - Targets, Allocation Process, Management 
 

Special (Housing) County Council Meeting 08.01.24 
 
Ms. A. McLoughlin set out the policy context for AHB’s under Housing for All with a targeted deliv-
ery of 40% of the units. Ms. McLoughlin also detailed the allocation process, management, and reg-
ulation of AHB units. 
3. 
Questions and Answers 
Mr. T. Enright, Ms. C. Godkin, Mr. E. Taaffe and members of the Housing Department responded to 
a wide range of queries from the Elected Members regarding the following: 
• Has land been acquired across all villages in the Kilmuckridge district? 
• Who decides whether a project is an AHB or Wexford County Council project? 
• How is the allocation of AHB properties managed? 
• How is the maintenance of AHB properties managed? 
• How do we decide which AHB’s we will work with? 
• Are we exploring land acquisition in rural areas? 
• Does the Council intend providing serviced sites for sale? 
• Executive were congratulated on new emergency accommodation provided in the Moyne. 
• The demand for 1 bed and 2 bed units. 
• Request that the Council does not build 1 bed units as they can lead to social isolation. 
• Concern over lack of accountability of AHB’s to the Council and the Members. 
• Concern expressed over AHB capacity to deliver units in Taghmon. 
• Why aren’t more units being delivered through Repair and Lease and Buy and Renew 
schemes? 
• How many social units are Wexford County Council going to build, broken down by 
Municipal District and number of bedrooms? 
• Is Wexford County Council liaising with Uisce Éireann re: getting sites serviced. 
• Request that if 65 units are being delivered in Bunclody, units should be delivered on a 
phased basis, with mixed tenure, and all required services provided. 
• Query on delay in delivery of units in Ramsfort. 
• Can affordable housing units in Gorey be ringfenced for locals? 
• Can a provision be put in place to allow single fathers to access a property having regard to 
the number of children they have? 
• Is there a specific plan for the delivery of units in villages? 
• Can rightsizing be facilitated? 
• Is Wexford County Council considering log cabin type units? 
Cllr.’s J. O’Rourke, J. Owens and M. Bell left the meeting at this point. 

Special (Housing) County Council Meeting 08.01.24 
 
• Frustration expressed in relation to Respond units in the Irishtown which have been vacant 
for years. 
• Query as to why the number of units being planned for Rosbercon is still changing? 
• When will 24 units be built in Arthurstown? 
• Do we know how many of the 1,075 units granted planning permission up to November 
2023 have been commenced? Do we have any power to get these units built? 
• How many units will be delivered in the Rosslare Municipal District up to 2026? 
• Concern expressed that lack of investment in services in rural areas is leading to a lack of 
units being delivered. 
• Proposal for 75 units at the Lyre was welcomed. 
• What is the status of affordable housing proposals for Enniscorthy and across the county? 
• Criticism of policy of acquiring turnkey units and thereby competing with first time buyers. 
• Are there any proposals for modular housing delivery? 
• Are there zoned land tax maps available? 
• Request for a breakdown of demand and supply by area. 
• View expressed that the Council should be far more vociferous in managing AHB’s. 
• Request for Local Area Plans to identify where development is needed. 
Cllr. G. Carthy left the meeting at this point. 
• View expressed that Wexford County Council need to engage with small developers as they 
won’t quote for Council work due to stipulations. 
Cllr. L. Kelly left the meeting at this point. 
• Request for a map of Wexford County Council’s landbank. 
• What is the timeline for work in St. Walerans? 
• Is construction at Ramsfort Park still on target to commence in March 2024? 
• Frustration expressed that there aren’t plans to deliver units in Marshallstown as there is 
serviced land available. 
THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING. 
 
Daingithe ar an            
lá de Feabhra, 2024. 
________________________ 
 
 
________________________ 
Cllr. John Fleming 
 
 
 
 
Michael Drea,  
Cathaoirleach  
 
 
 
 
County Secretary 
