Presidin :
Present:
n Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council,
held on Monday 3rd November, 2014
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Cllrs. B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O.
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance,
Ms E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner,
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner,
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer,
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer.
1.
(a)
CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 13th
October, 2014
The minutes of the Ordinary Meeting held on 13th October were proposed by Cllr. Cameron,
seconded by Cllr. McNelis, and agreed.
Elected Members raised a number of matters arising from the minutes and the Chief Executive and
officials responded to queries regarding signage relating to dog fouling, meetings regarding the
bike share scheme, the Galway Transportation Study and the UNESCO City of Film Bid.
2.
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Approval of Oveüaft Accommodation 2015.
Ms E. McCormack, Head of Finance, stepped through her report regarding the approval sought for
an overdraft accommodation for 2015 of €10 million.
Cllr McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Conneely, approval for the overdraft accommodation
and this was agreed.
(b) Proposed New Member of Galway Salthill Failte Ltd.
On the proposal of the Mayor, this item was deferred pending the outcome of legal advices which
the board of Galway Salthill Failte Ltd. is awaiting.
1
(c) Nomination of 11 Members to Galway City Joint Policing Committee.
Cllr. Fahy proposed, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, that Councillors O'Flaherty, Cubbard, Lyons,
McDonnell, Conneely, McNelis and Fahy be nominated to Galway City Joint Policing Committee.
Cllr. M.J.Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. O.Crowe, that Cllr. Keane be nominated to the JPC.
Cllr. Keane proposed, seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe, that Cllr. M.J. Crowe be nominated to the JPC.
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Fahy, that Cllr. Connolly be nominated to the JPC.
Cllr. Marley proposed, seconded by Cllr Fahy, that Cllr. Farrell be nominated to the JPC.
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Farrell, that Cllr. Marley be nominated to the JPC.
Following clarification from the Meetings Administrator regarding Standing Order 69, Cllr. M.J.
Crowe withdrew his name from nomination.
The Mayor proposed that the remaining 11 members' names be nominated to the JPC. This was
agreed by 11 members in favour, 1 against with 4 abstentions and was deemed by the Mayor as
carried.
(d) To Schedule a Special Meeting on Monday 10th November.
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, advised the Mayor and Members that the final report on the
proposed Christmas Market for 2014 was currently being compiled following the conclusion of the
consultation period.
On the proposal of Cllr. O. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. Connolly, it was agreed to hold a Special
Meeting to consider the report on Monday 10th November at 5.30pm.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3.
(a) Corporate Policy Group Meetings held on 20th October, 31st October and 3M
November.
Elected Members were advised that the Corporate Policy Group had met on the dates above to
receive briefings in relation to the Draft Annual Budget 2015. Recommendations from the CPG in
relation to Draft Budget will come forward to the Annual Budget Meeting to be held on Monday
10th November.
Councillors O. Crowe and O'Flaherty wished it to be noted that neither had been present at the
meeting of 20th October.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4.
(a) Chief Executive's Report for November 2014
Members raised a number of issues arising from the Chief Executive's report for November that
had been previously circulated. These included the European Capital of Culture 2020, the CFRAM
consultation process, European Regional Office in Brussels, consultation with the NTA regarding
the bike share scheme and the proposed disposal of the Royal Tara site.
In response the Chief Executive, along with other officials, provided responses and further
2
elaborations to the queries raised.
(b) Quarterly Reports
(i) Environment (Quarter Ending 30th September)
Members raised a number of issues arising from the quarterly report previously circulated. The
issues included charges at the civic amenity site, the tidy towns and gardens prize-giving
ceremony, litter bins across the city, the composting facility at Carrowbrowne, the foreshore
license for Såilin, South Park, the Community Warden service, derelict sites enforcement, the
disposal of oil-based paints, the automated public convenience at Salmon Weir Bridge, graffiti, the
location of bottle banks, the maintenance of the waterways network in the city and timing of the
presentation and collection of waste and refuse.
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, responded to queries raised and provided clarification on a
number of points. He advised that several of the topics will be dealt with at the Environment,
Recreation & Amenity SPC as part of its work programme.
(ii) Recreation & Amenity (Quarter Ending September)
Members raised a number of issues arising from the quarterly report previously circulated. The
issues included the completion and availability of Westside Sports Campus and the possibilities of
providing lighting through the park, the re-allocation and further development of allotments, the
area around Eamon Deacy Park in Terryland, the improvement in the grass-cutting regime,
community planting, play facilities, bonfires, the operation of Knocknacarra Community Centre,
vandalism at McGrath's Field, tennis courts and removal of seaweed from the beaches. Other
issues which were the subject of discussion were the Sports Capital Grants, the refurbishment of
the diving tower and the removal, for safety reasons, of the raft at Blackrock, Salthill.
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, and Mr. S. Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent
responded to queries raised and provided clarification on a number of points. Members were
advised that several of the topics would be dealt with at the Environment, Recreation & Amenity
SPC as part of its work programme.
(Ili) Community, Culture & Economic Development (Quarter Ending 30Nl September)
The Chief Executive informed members that he had recently appointed Ms E. Ruane as Acting
Director of Services with responsibility for this area. He and officials responded to queries and
provided clarification in relation to a range of issues arising from the quarterly report. These issues
included the art-house cinema, the development of the museum and of Comerford House, the
Sports Partnership supports for minority sports, the replica of the Padraig Ö Conaire statue, the
purchase of 23 Nuns' Island, the MeetWest conference, the excellence of the Trickster show
involving the Brothers of Charity clients and Mind the Gap from Bradford, Westside Arts Festival,
Social Inclusion Week, the UNESCO City of Film and European Capital of Culture 2020 bids.
On the proposal of Cllr. Flannery, seconded by Cllr. Walsh, the following motion was unanimously
agreed,
"That Galway City Council, on behalf of the people of Gawlay, send a message of
congratulations to every member of the Macnas Theatre Group for the wonderful spectacle
we witnessed last Halloween and over many years."
3
On the proposal of Cllr. M.J. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty, it was agreed to invite the
promoters of the art-house cinema to attend the next Ordinary Meeting of City Council to provide
an update on progress to completion of the facility.
On the proposal of Cllr. Cameron, seconded by Cllr. McNelis, the following motion was
unanimously agreed:
"That Galway City Council requests the Minister for Arts, Culture and the Gaeltacht to urgently
meet the operators of the Palace Picture House Cinema."
Ms P. Philbin, acting Senior Executive Officer, advised that the Economic Development and Culture
SPC would be convened and would consider several of the issues raised as part of its work
programme.
Having reached 7.30pm, Members agreed to extend to deal with 4. (b) (iv), outstanding motions
and finish.
On the proposal of Cllr. McDonnell, seconded by Cllr. McNelis, and supported by Councillors Fahy,
O. Crowe, O'Flaherty, Lyons, Cameron, Larkin, Walsh and Conneely, the following motion was
unanimously agreed under Standing Order 22,
"That Galway City Council invites the European Liaison Officer of Donegal County Council to
make a presentation ret European Office and the funding available."
(iv) Transport (Quarter ending 30th September.)
Members raised a number of issues arising from the quarterly report previously circulated. The
issues included traffic issues and the impact of road openings on congestion, the operation of the
Urban Traffic Management Centre, taking-in-charge, structural inspections of bridges, the Cycling
& Walking Strategy and the Salmon Weir Bridge
Mr J. O'Neill, Director of Services, responded to queries raised and provided clarification on a
number of points. He advised that he would revert regarding a number of specific queries with
further information.
(d)
(E)
Construction of 110kV Underground Cable from Knockranny 110kV
Substation, Co. Galway, to the 110kV Ballybrit Substaton, Co. Galway (Cable)
Deferred
Draft Regional Waste Management Plan
Deferred
Update on European Capital of Culture 2020
4
The topic was dealt with largely under 2. (b) (iii) above. The Mayor pointed out that he ad written
to An Taoiseach requesting that the process the invite bids be commenced.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
NOTICE OF MOTIONS:
Deferred.
QUESTIONS
CORRESPONDENCE:
Deferred
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION
For Councillors information
CONFERENCES
Proposed by Cllr. Keane, seconded by the Mayor, and agreed.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy
It was proposed that a vote of sympathy be extended to Cllr. Ö Conchüir on the recent
death of his uncle.
Votes of Congratulations
Galway FC on their promotion to the Premier Division
Ms Åine Brazil on her selection as International Engineer of the Year
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
None
The Meeting concluded at 8.05pm
5
