Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
A olo ies:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 4th February 2019
at 2.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, and T. O'Flaherty.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
. D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr
N. Moggan, A/ Head Of Finance
Ms.
H. Martyn, Senior Executive Officer
MS.
Mr.
B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
T. Prendergast, A/ Senior Engineer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms.
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms
. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS
Councillors: B. Cameron, and J. Walsh.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line
with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Mayor welcomed all to the meeting, and noted the apologies of Councillor J. Walsh. The Mayor
expressed his sympathies to the Chief Executive on behalf of Council Members on his recent bereavement.
This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
The Mayor advised that the meeting would commence with an update on the RSES workshop held earlier
that day, followed by an item of information, requested by the Chief Executive. Then the meeting would
proceed in the order of the Agenda.
Item 1 (a) - Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy (RSES) for the Northern and Western
Regional Assembly/ Metropplitan Area Strategic Plan (MASP).
A workshop for Councillors on the Draft RSES was held on the 4th of February 2019. The deadline for
submissions is Friday the 8th of February 2019.
Mr B. McGrath summarised the main points raised by Elected Members at the workshop:
• The Draft RSES should be revised to include for a comprehensive Galway MASP section that reflects
the NPF approach for Galway city.
11 Page
The MASP boundary should be revised to include Moycullen and Athenry.
The RSES and MASP needs to be linked to an implementation strategy that provides direction for
local, regional and national investment and sets priorities.
Galway Harbour requires more emphasis in the document.
Settlement in Ardaun should include for both county and city.
Need for specific retail strategy that protects city centre uses.
Climate change impacts should be factored in including for coastal erosion and the Sailin project
prioritised.
Economic value and potential of City needs to be emphasised.
Broad band and Wi-Fi capacity needs to be highlighted.
Capital of culture and urban tourism and Gaeltacht importance to be emphasised.
Transport investment in city and connections to MASP settlements is required.
Compact urban growth can only be achieved with investment in public realm, parks, amenities and
recreation.
Greater emphasis on education and in particular the Connacht Ulster Alliance.
Following the workshop, the Mayor brought forward a motion to extend the MASP to include Moycullen
and Athenry. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir proposed that the MASP "take cognisance of the Galway Transport Strategy already in
existence". This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
The Chief Executive observed that the strong view of the workshop was that the draft document on display
would need some material changes.
Item of Information
The Mayor advised that at this point in the Agenda, he would introduce an Item of Information, at the
request of the Chief Executive.
The Chief Executive informed members that under the Local Government Act, and the Planning and
Development Act, he had signed an Emergency Order that morning, for the provision of modular
emergency accommodation at Westside, in order to address the acute needs of homeless people in
Galway City.
Mr. D. Mahon gave a report on the Family Hub, and the requirement for the facility. The hub will be a
temporary facility, for five years, which will complement the Housing Capital Programme as interim
accommodation in place of B&Bs and hotels. It is anticipated that the facility will be constructed by August
2019, with 15 temporary accommodation units and two service units operational by September 2019,
under the management of the Peter McVerry Trust. Consultation will take place on the final design of the
site, and future use of the site.
The Mayor reminded the public gallery that Standing Orders do not permit photography or the recording
of Council Meetings.
The Mayor invited questions from Elected Members.
Queries raised by Councillors included:
Galway City Development Plan; zoning of the land; future use of the site; funding for the facility;
consultation with businesses; numbers accommodated; access; parking; security; Notices to Quit; site
21 Page
selection; duration families would be accommodated for; protection of privacy of residents on/ behind
the site; playground on site.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to queries raised by Elected Members. Mr. T. Prendergast
detailed further technical aspects of the hub. The Chief Executive advised that Emergency Powers were
used as the most expedient way to put this facility in place, and to get families and children out of
intolerable and wholly inappropriate places to bring up children, or to live in for any length of time.
Demands on homeless services have increased significantly, and the Family Hub would be a temporary
part of the solution, complementary to the Housing Capital Programme.
The Mayor invited clarifications from Elected Members. Councillors acknowledged the work of the
Housing Staff to address issues in the City.
The Mayor suspended the meeting at 3.34pm for five minutes, to allow Cllr. O. Crowe to withdraw
comments made. The Mayor resumed the meeting at 3.39pm. Cllr. O. Crowe withdrew the remark which
had caused offence to the Mayor.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to clarifications comprehensively. The Chief Executive indicated that the
Development Plan would be under review in 2021, before the 5 year term of the temporary
accommodation was up. At this point, Members can review zoning and future use of the land beyond
February 2024.
Cllr. F. Fahy requested that the number of families being catered for in 2015 and 2018 be circulated to
Members.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Mayor N. McNelis
Galway City Council support the use of modular housing on a temporary basis as part of a solution to the
challenge in the provision of social housing in recognition of the need to get families out of private
emergency accommodation.
In Favour: 8 Against: 5 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
I propose a workshop be held in the Westside Community Centre to relay information to residents and
business owners regarding the modular family hub in Westside.
In Favour: 11 Against: O Abstain: 3 Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor invited the Meetings Administrator to notify attendees of the Standing Order relating to
recording of meetings. Mr. G. Mahon reiterated Standing Order 22: "No unauthorised audio, video or
photographic recording of the business of the Meeting shall be permitted by anyone present at a Meeting
except by resolution of at least one-half of the total number of Councillors voting in favour. Any other
audio/ visual recordings must have the approval of the Council".
31 Page
Item 1 (b) Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF)
Mayor McNelis took Item 1 (b). The Chief Executive clarified that Item 1 (b) and 1 (e) should be taken
together, as the heading on 1 (b) should be Designated Urban Centre Grant. 1 (e) refers to the Urban
Regeneration Fund.
Mr. U. Finn gave a report on the items, to accompany reports circulated. The Chief Executive asked
Members to note the report, as it will appear on an agenda again as a Part VIII or Part X Planning
Application, in 2019 or 2020. The full Galway City Centre Traffic Management Plan would be presented to
Council at the February Ordinary Meeting.
Queries raised by Councillors in relation to the Cycling and Pedestrian Bridge in the vicinity of the
Salmon Weir Bridge included:
Maintenance of existing bridge; timelines; width of footpaths; water safety; costs; access for cyclists/
pedestrians; bollards on bridge; fisheries structures; impact of Brexit on tendering; 'technical assistance'
and project categories; Ardaun upgrade; Sandy Road project; Cycling Strategy; maintenance of cycle lanes;
the Court House; Galway Harbour; and Nuns Island redevelopment.
Mr. U. Finn responded to Councillors queries comprehensively. The project is part of the overall Galway
Transport Strategy, and it is anticipated that construction of the bridge will commence in 2020, in line
with planning and procurement requirements. Mr. U. Finn advised that Appendix F to the main report
previously circulated shows details of proposed Primary Routes for Walking and Cycling. The Chief
Executive advised that a report on the Harbour Master Planning project would come before Council in
March or April 2019.
Cllr. P. Conneely proposed, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell, a motion of support for the development of
the bridge which was agreed unanimously.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty proposed a motion regarding maintenance of the existing bridge. The motion was
amended as below.
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
"l propose that the piers along the Salmon Weir Bridge are sand blasted and brought back to their original
stone as painting is not ideal with those piers."
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor reviewed the agenda and advised that Quarterly Reports (Items 1 (g) i-v) would be deferred to
the Ordinary Meeting on the 11th February.
The Mayor proceeded to take a vote on a Motion by Cllr. P. Flannery, without debate.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded by: Cllr. O. Crowe Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. M. Farrell;
Cllr. M. Lohan; Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M.
Crowe; Cllr. P. Conneely; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr.
T. O'Flaherty; Cllr. D. Lyons; Mayor N. McNelis;
Supported by Cllr. John Walsh (Absent)
Galway City Council and its elected body recognises the funding crisis in third level education due to
persistent underfunding over the last decade and the continuing increase in student numbers in
universities and other third level colleges and calls on the government to:
41 Page
Act on the recommendations of the Cassells Report published in 2016 which sets out clear
options for the sustainable funding of third level education;
Provide the necessary investment in the next Budget (2020) to substantially increase the core
funding per student which has fallen by almost half in ten years.
We recognise and assert that our third level graduates are an essential ingredient to economic growth
and, unless investment in third level is increased, we will damage the future competitiveness of the Irish
economy and of our society as a whole.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Item 1 (c) Large Scale Soorts Infrastructure Fund (DTTAS)
The Chief Executive reported on the details of the LSSI Fund. The deadline for applications to the fund is
the 17th April 2019. Mr. McGrath suggested that a workshop for Elected Members would take place from
1.15pm to 3.00pm, before the Ordinary Meeting on the 11th of February 2019. Three potential applications
would be presented for consideration for support.
Cllr. M. Cubbard requested that presentations be sent by email to any Councillor not in a position to attend
the workshop. The Chief Executive agreed to this.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposal to defer Item 1 (c), and hold a workshop for Elected Members from 1.15pm to 3.00pm, before
the Ordinary Meeting on the 11th of February 2019.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Item 1 (d) Update on transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of Mercy to Galway City
Council.
The Chief Executive presented the report on the proposed transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of
Mercy to Galway City Council, as part of the national Redress scheme. A final report on archaeological and
geological issues has been completed, with no issues for concern.
A copy of the report will be circulated to Members.
The Chief Executive believes the transfer may now be completed. There are conditions for usage of the
property as a Children and Young Persons Educational and Cultural Hub. The Chief Executive indicated
that while the site will also sensitively commemorate anyone who had an involvement in the building, it
would not be Galway City Council's role to develop it as a national commemorative centre for former
institutional residents.
The Sisters of Mercy have agreed to donate an additional €750,000 outside of the redress scheme.
However, the Chief Executive advised that the European Regional Development funding originally
proposed to redevelop the site is no longer available, as the works had to be complete by 2020.
Fl P age
Should Galway City Council complete the transfer at this time, further funding will need to be pursued to
develop the site. The funding donated by the Sisters of Mercy may be required to safeguard, secure and
maintain the building as it is.
The Mayor invited Councillors' questions, but advised that as it was 5.40pm, speaking time would have to
be reduced to finish at 6.00pm.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that each speaker have 1 minute. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell. Cllr. P.
Conneely proposed that the discussion be deferred to the Ordinary Meeting. A discussion ensued, and the
Mayor agreed to come back to this at the next Council Meeting, as Members had indicated that they
wanted more time to discuss it.
Item 1 (h) - Notice of Motion deferred from Council Meeting of 14th January 2019
The Chief Executive advised that the Motion in its current form could not be enacted. The Draft Waste
Bye Laws, due to commence on the 18th February 2019, allow for waste to be managed through means
other than a contract with a waste disposal body.
A discussion ensued. Queries raised by Councillors included the Waste Bye Laws; illegal dumping;
enforcement; targeting of social housing; and privatisation of waste collection.
The Chief Executive advised against making policy at a Council Meeting. The Chief Executive
recommended the motion be referred to the Environment SPC with a policy paper from Galway City
Council for discussion. Mr. D. Mahon advised that the Waste Bye-Laws, as adopted, could not be altered
for six months. As the motion related solely to Galway City Council tenants, it could be referred to the
Housing SPC.
The Mayor observed that there were flaws in the wording of the motion, and asked Cllr. P. Flannery to
review it. The motion was amended as below.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
All people allocated housing or supported for housing by Galway City Council must show proof
within a period of one month of occupancy of having a contract with a recognised waste disposal/
collection body for the disposal of household waste once an allocation is made.
The Motion was deferred.
The Mayor noted that as the time was now 6.00pm, the amended motion would be deferred.
The meeting closed at 6.00pm.
Item 1 (f) Chief Executive's Reports
(i) Chief Executive Report December 2018 — Circulated December 2018.
(ii) Chief Executive Report January 2019 — Circulated January 2019.
Not considered
Item 1 (g) quarterlv Reports for quarter ending 31st December 2018
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development
Not considered
61 Page
nfirmed & Signa
Mayor of Galway