Presiding:
Present:
Apologies
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 5th October 2020.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, , E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Higgins, N. Larkin & D. McDonnell
McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. B.
McNally, Director of Services
Ms. R.
Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. B.
Prendergast, A/Director of Services
Mr. T.
Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr. U.
Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms. C.
Mr. G.
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms. G.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator opened the meeting and referred attendees to the
standard operating guidelines for attendance at Council meetings, where it is recommended to
wear face coverings on entry to the meeting until attendees are seated and exiting the meeting
and also when moving through public areas of Leisureland.
Mayor Cubbard referred to the agenda and the consideration of Motions and requested that the
proposer and seconder speak on the matter in order to expedite the meeting.
1. NOTICES OF MOTION
Mayor Cubbard commenced with NOM 34/2019 and Cllr. D. Lyons seconded the motion.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons that the wording of the motion be amended to replace the
former Minister Zappone with the current Minister O'Gorman. This was seconded by Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty and agreed.
Mayor Cubbard spoke on the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T. O'Flaherty,
M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons.
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister O'Gorman and request that his
Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediate allows Adoptees access
Min s, Cop r ved & Signed
ll/lcyo
their personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality
and personal autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
In favour: 9 Against: 2 Abstain: 1 Present: 12
The Motion was approved
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 43/2019. Cllr. M. O'Connor seconded the motion
and requested the removal of the Minister's names as they had since been replaced. This was
agreed.
Cllr. O. Hanley spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 43/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. M. O' Connor.
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality and the Minister of State for
Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special responsibility for Equality,
Immigration and Integration, calling for the closure of all Galway based Direct Provision Centres
and instead, offer residents suitable, community-based accommodation and services for
children and families.
In favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was approved
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 25/2019. Cllr. T. O' Flaherty seconded the
motion. Councillor J. Connolly and O' Flaherty spoke on the motion and Councillors discussed same.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised and advised that a report will issue
regarding the use of vending machines for recyclables. A vote was taken as follows:
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund
scheme specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
In favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motions was approved
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 26/2019. Cllr. D. Lyons seconded the motion.
21 Page
Cllr. J. Connolly spoke on the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately:
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force personnel.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: 1 Present: 15
The Motions was approved
Mayor Cubbard noted that a response issued in relation to NOM 41/2019. Cllr. D. Lyons seconded
the motion. Cllr. J. Connolly spoke on the motion and the significant history to be commemorated.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services and Mr. J.
Higgins, Heritage Officer will proceed as soon as possible, in consultation with Councillors and othe
stakeholders to draft a programme to mark the centenary of these events.
A vote was taken on the motion.
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020 marking
the centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred in Galway
during 1920 including but not exclusive to:
• The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke
in September 1920.
• The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
• The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
• The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
• The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces. "
In favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motions was approved
31 Page
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 44/2019. Cllr. F. Fahy seconded the motion.
Cllr. D. Lyons declared an interest to the meeting advising that he worked for a company that
operate on the 4G network. This was noted.
Cllr. C. Connolly spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion. Cllr. C. Connolly requested
a roll call vote. This was seconded by Cllr. M. O'Connor and Cllr. F. Fahy and a roll call vote was taken.
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
"ln light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries
warning about the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure
to electromagnetic radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the environment
and the public from harm:
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on CommReg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a
working group to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and
human health due to the current questionable scientific knowledge."
In Favour: Cllrs: C. Connolly & F. Fahy
Against: Cllrs: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley;
E. Hoare; P. Keane; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Abstain: Cllr. D. Lyons
In favour: 2 Against: 12 Abstain: 1 Present: 15
The Motions was defeated
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 57/2019. Cllr. J. Connolly seconded the motion.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion.
The Meetings Administrator agreed to revert on a former motion put forward by Cllr. D.
Lyons regarding e-cigarettes and give an updated response to same.
Councillors discussed the motion and a vote was taken:
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals etc. a
all workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
41 Page
In favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motions was approved
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Present: 15
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib.
Not Considered.
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 69/2019. Cllr. O. Hanley seconded the motion.
Cllr. N. McNelis spoke on the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 69/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th December 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Galway City Council calls to expand the remit of IPB Insurance to provide public liability
insurance, at an affordable rate, to community events and festivals that are otherwise unable
to source affordable insurance. We also call on other local authorities, Regional Assemblies and
ETBs to also ask for this motion to be supported.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 14
The Motions was approved
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 05/2020. Cllr. N. McNelis seconded the motion.
Cllr. O. Hanley spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 05/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 27th January 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
That Galway City Council call on the Minister with responsibilities for local government to
hold a plebiscite vote on a proposal for a directly elected Mayor with executive functions.
In favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motions was approved
51 Page
NOM 06/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 27th February 2020
That Galway City Council contacts the Board of NUI Galway requesting them to reverse the
recent decision to impose a 4% increase in on-campus accommodation for the academic year
20/21. This sets out the wrong message and directly contradicts the NUI Strategic Plan 20-25
which prioritises the provision of affordable and sustainable on campus accommodation for
its students.
A prior response to the motion had issued to Cllr. Hoare.
NOM 07/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 21st April 2020
Galway City Council agrees to establish a Business Forum which is constituted by all
relevant stakeholders. The Forum will plan Galway's response to and, exit from, Covjd19 with
the intention of protecting local businesses. The Forum agrees to have its first meeting at the
earliest opportunity.
A prior response to the motion had issued to Cllr. Higgins.
NOM 08/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the hospitality
industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.
Not Considered.
NOM 12/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 17th May 2020
I am calling on Galway City Council to waiver the outdoor Licence fees for businesses with
outdoor seating and tables until December 20/20 to give pubs, restaurants and cafes the
opportunity to get back into positive cashflow. The application will apply as always but no fees
will be charged.
A prior response to the motion had issued to Cllr.Cheevers.
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 15/2020. Cllr. E. Hoare seconded the motion.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 15/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 2nd July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to legislate, for the outlawing of the purchase
of mobile phones, SIM cards, electronic communication devices etc. without a valid form
of identification.
In favour: 8 Against: 5 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
6 IP age
The Motions was passed.
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to NOM 18/2020. Cllr. D. Lyons seconded the motion.
Cllr. N. McNelis spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion and a vote was taken.
NOM 18/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt September 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That this Council calls on the government to bring forward legislation requiring all employers by
law to make provision for sick leave, i.e., paid time off from work for workers when they are all
ill. Also to amend the Parental Leave Act 1998, (force majeure leave) with a new provision. In
such a case an employee who is the parent or adoptive parent of a child shall be entitled to
force majeure leave where and for so long as the child is unable to attend the school or
pre-school, if the presence of the employee is required at his or her home in order to care for
that child.
In favour: 7 Against: 7 Abstain: 1 Present: 15
In line with Standing Order 62 where there is an equity of votes, by a second or casting vote of
the person chairing the meeting (which person shall have and may choose to exercise such a vote),
Mayor Cubbard gave a casting vote in favour of the motion.
The Motions was carried.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 3/2020
Question given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 7th September 2020
Can a report issue to Councillors regarding the following: (1) Number of hours worked in
overtime by Outdoor Council Staff in Environment charged with litter collection for the
year 2019/Jan-present 2020? (2) What is the cost of overtime worked for those periods?
(3) What is the difference and cost of scheduled timetable hours for staff for those periods
versus overtime? (4) What is the explanation for overtime approved? (5) Following my motion
to Council to provide a costing of dealing with illegal dumping in the City - has this been done?
How is the costing carried out and analysed and can you include those details in the report?
Initial Reply issued with Agenda 9th September 2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed. '
Not Considered.
71 Page
Mayor Cubbard referred to the motion submitted by Cllr. F. Fahy on 6th July 2020.
Cllr. F. Fahy spoke on the motion and Councillors discussed same. Cllr. F. Fahy advised that the
proposed time period of this proposal is for the duration of the coronavirus pandemic period.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that any changes in the current parking byelaws should be
by amendment. Thee byelaws can be amended as part of the budgetary process at the
Annual Budget Meeting in relation to parking charges.
Cllr. Fahy agreed to leave this motion on the agenda.
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the City that
parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to encourage
people to come into the city.'
To Remain on Agenda.
Mayor Cubbard requested a seconder to the motion submitted by Cllr. E. Hoare on 6th July 2020.
Cllr. F. Fahy seconded the motion.
Cllr. E. Hoare spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that the City Council was in contact with NUI Galway who
has advised that based on current patterns of travel arising from COVID that this would not
be considered immediately but will be kept under review for future discussions. Mr. McGrath
added that the University has confirmed that the Dangan Sports Grounds will be considered for
use by the Park and Stride programme.
Cllr. E. Hoare withdrew the motion based on the update received from the Chief Executive.
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 6th July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Propose that Galway city Council liaise with NUI Galway with a view to introducing/discussing
the potential for a temporary park and ride facility at Corrib Village
Motion Withdrawn.
Mayor Cubbard referred to the motion submitted by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty at the last Council
meeting.
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty spoke on the motion. Councillors discussed the motion.
Following discussion Cllr. O' Flaherty agreed to leave the motion on the agenda for further
consideration.
8 | Page
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'l call on the Parks, Recreation and Amenity Departments to reverse its decision not to collect
the bags of grass cuttings etc., left out for collection in bags which were provided by the City
Council, but which are now left lying in the green areas in a number of estates throughout the
city. I'm also requesting that this service should continue indefinitely, to facilitate the works
carried out by the Community Employment Scheme participants throughout the year, as has
been the case up to now.'
The Meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
91 page
