Presidin :
Present:
010 ies:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 8th June 2015,
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, T. O'Flaherty, P. Flannery, P. Keane
N. Larkin, A. Marley; D. McDonnell, N. McNelis; T. O'Flaherty & J
Walsh.
Cllr. O. Crowe,
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services,
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Mr. D. Mahon, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Engineer,
Mr. G. McMahon A/Senlor Executive Oficer,
Mr. L Hanrahan, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner,
Ms. H. Martyn, Administrative Officer
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Presentation by Connacht Rugby
Mayor Lyons welcomed Mr. W. Ruane CEO Connacht Rugby to the meeting who provided a
comprehensive presentation with reference to: overview of current activities; the economic
impact of the club in the city, estimated at over €13m p.a; initiatives to target increased
overseas visitors to Galway; impact of increased media coverage and attendances at games;
opportunities to work in partnership with the City Council and use of the funding allocated
under the Marketing Fund; opportunities to promote Galway's Capital of Culture bid 2020
and its role in the wider Connacht region to support the development and participation in
rugby.
Following the presentation a number of members congratulated and thanked Mr. Ruane for
the significant impact of Connacht Rugby on sports participation and economic activity in
the city and region and the efforts to promote Galway as a tourism destination. The
importance of supporting Galway's bilingual status was noted and request issued that the
Sportsgrounds support this bi-lingual status; the issue of the potential to develop grounds at
an alternative location was raised and Mr. Ruane stated that a facilities working group had
1
been established to examine all issues in relation to the stadium from a players and
supporters perspective and that a needs audit would be completed. The importance of the
city centre venue was noted as being a significant driver of match day experience for
supporters.
Dates for Meetings:
Mayor Lyons noted the date for the Annual Meeting for Monday 15th June at 6.00 pm and
advised that a request had been received through the Corporate Policy Group to amend the
date for the July meeting scheduled for 13th July. Following discussion it was proposed by
Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron to reschedule the date for the July meeting to
Monday 6th July. The motion was unanimously agreed.
1.
(a)
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Mondav 11th May,
2015
Proposed:
Matters of Accuracy:
Matters Arising:
Cllr. P. Conneely:
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty:
Cllr. F. Fahy:
Cllr. C. Connolly:
Cllr. D. McDonnell:
Cllr. F. Fahy
None
Seconded:
Cllr. M. Cubbard.
The following issues were raised under Matters Arising.
Status update on Pédraic Ö Conaire statue and Christmas
Market report.
Status update on Dog Pound and Brown Door way.
Status update on webcasting report, Royal Tara valuation
report costs and Eyre Square Christmas Market.
Status update on South Park report, staffing for Westside
Community Centre and the MADRA report.
Status update on Christmas Market report.
Replies to queries were issued from Mr. B. McGrath CE who noted that he had recently met
with the Galway City Centre Business Association who will outline a proposal for Christmas
in Galway 2015 at the July meeting. Mr. T. Connell DOS replied to queries on the Dog pound
noting closing date for receipt of tenders for works was pending; MADRA report would be
provided at the July meeting; sanction request issued to the Department for staff for
community centres; South Park report would be considered at the September meeting of
Council. Ms. E. Ruane A/ DOS noted that a request for tenders had been issued to 4
foundries for the Pådraic Ö Conaire replica and that a report on webcasting was outlined in
the CPG report under Item 3 on the agenda.
2
(b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 25å May.
2015
Proposed:
Matters of Accuracy:
Matters Arising:
Cllr. M. Farrell
Cllr. P. Connelly
Cllr. C. Connolly
Cllr. P. Keane
Cllr. P. Flannery:
Cllr. F. Fahy
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Cllr. M.J Crowe
Cllr. A. Marley
Cllr. B. Cameron
Cllr. D. McDonnell
None
Seconded:
Cllr. M. Farrell
The following issues were raised under Matters Arising.
Status update on recruitment of Irish Language Officer and
Ballymoneen rd housing development
Lough Atalia traffic management plan and dates to revert back
to two way system.
Status update on Wolfe Tone bridge, housing lands effected by
GTS route, Sailin proposal, Irish Language Officer, Lough Atalia
road works, speeding issues and local consultation.
Status update on Taylor's Hill and Maunsells road works and
clarification on funding.
Status update on Blackrock raft report.
Status update on Lough Atalia works, Kirwin roundabout and
Galway City Museum opening hours.
Status update on Responsible Dog Ownership and erection of
signage, Ballyloughnane beach and no swim notices, bottle
bank locations, Merlin Park junction, horse removal contractor
in place and costs of same
Status update on Lough Atalia works, Housing issues including
poor attendance by members at previous meeting to discuss
quarterly Housing report.
Status update on Lough Atalia works and request for report on
impact of TMP on other locations in the city including
Bohermore.
Status update on watermains replacement at Thomas Hynes
rd, consultation with residents on Lough Atalia / College Rd,
Ballymoneen Rd and impact of GTS on housing plans.
Status update on Greenway proposals, watermains
replacement at Thomas Hynes rd.
Replies to queries were issued from Mr. B. McGrath CE who noted that in relation to Lough
Atalia the advertised traffic management plan covered an 11 week period and the two way
system would be reintroduced after the 3 week trial period as agreed with members at the
previous meeting. Ms. S. Connolly SE also provided updates on Lough Atalia works in
response to member queries and clarified queries on all other transportation issues raised.
Mr. T. Connell DOS stated that no response had yet been received from the Department on
Ballymoneen Road but advised that the Council will be proceeding initially with 14 units;
3
total amount of lands impacted by GTS would be issued to members; in relation to Sailin Mr.
Connell advised members that the 29th May was the closing date for consultation and the
Council would be pressing the Department for a response to the Foreshore License
application; the extent of signage erected for Responsible Dog Ownership campaign was
outlined; clarification was provided on horse removal queries and updates on no swim
notices at Ballyloughnane and bottle bank locations would be provided.
Ms. E. Ruane A/DOS advised that sanction had not yet been received to recruit an Irish
Language Officer and the Department had been notified that an investigation had been
initiated by An Coimisinéir Teanga; Museum opening hours were outlined and Ms. Ruane
stated that the Museum operated on a 6 day basis in line with international norms and there
were no plans to extend to a 7 day service at this time. Mr. McGrath noted embargo in place
on recruitment of staff and that budget provision for additional staff must also be
considered. In relation to the post of Irish Language Officer, contact with Gaillimhe Le
Gaeilge to provide assistance to the Council had been made. Ms. E.McCormack HOF / DOS
advised that works on Thomas Hynes Rd mains replacement were scheduled to commence
in the coming weeks.
2.
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
It was proposed by the Mayor and agreed to take Item 2(e) as the next item on the Agenda.
(e)
Non-Motorised Passenger Transport Byelaw Amendments
Ms. H. Martyn AO referred to Report dated 2nd March 2015, issued to members at the
Council meeting held on 9th March 2015, and subsequent e-mail of 10th March 2015 in
relation to the proposed amendments to the Non-motorised Passenger Transporter Bye-
laws 2013. The proposed Bye-laws were placed on public display by way of advertisement in
the Galway Independent on 18th March 2015, with a closing date for submissions of 4p.m. on
6th May 2015. Ms. H. Martyn stated that it is proposed to amend:
Bye-law 36(6) which provides for the issuing of a Fixed Penalty Notice and a form of
notice is included in Appendix Ill of the byelaws. This bye-law states "The Council
" It is proposed to alter this to "An authorised person may issue..
may issue
An authorised person includes a member of an Garda Siochåna.
Appendix 11 of the bye-laws, which deals with the location of hackney carriages at the
designated hiring stand at Eyre Square North. It is proposed to designate a new
location opposite the Bank of Ireland in Eyre Square and is indicated on the map
attached to the draft bye-laws. This proposal would require a relocation of two of
the four disabled parking spaces at this location.
A number of submissions were received from the Community Wardens in relation to the
relocation of the hirinu stand and one submission was received from An Garda Siochåna in
relation to the authorised persons. Legal advice was sought in relation to the current draft
4
bye-laws. The bye-laws seek to control Non-motorised Passenger Transporters on footpaths
and pedestrian streets only, these are the areas over which the Council has statutory
control. The Council does not have the power to create bye-laws to control or impose laws
over public roads (other than control over parking). Ms. Martyn noted that the Access for
All Group were consulted in relation to the new location of the designated hiring stand for
hackney carriages and the relocation of the two disabled parking spaces. Following
discussion at the Transport SPC meeting on 26th May 2015, it was agreed that the proposed
amendments to the Non-motorised Passenger Transporter Bye-laws 2013 be brought to full
Council to be recommended for adoption. Pending adoption of the draft amendments,
hackney carriages may continue to operate in accordance with the current bye-laws.
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Walsh and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy the members unanimously
agreed with the amendments to the Byelaws as proposed.
(a)
Item 4(d)
Proposed New Member to Board of Salthill Fållte Ltd —
Filling of vacancies on Board of Salthill Fåilte Ltd following the resignation of
five members
Galway Salthill Fållte Ltd
Mr. T. Connell referred to report issued under Item 4(d) and advised members that the
decision to increase the number of members on the Board from 7 to 8 was made in
September 2014 and the members had been previously advised of same. A discussion on
the composition of the Board followed and Cllr. D. McDonnell stated that it was a matter for
the Board to consider increasing its membership further if appropriate.
The following nominations were made under Item 2
Mr. John Mulholland was proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. F.
Fahy
Cllr. P. Keane was proposed by Cllr. MJ Crowe and seconded by Cllr C. 6 Conch6ir
A poll was taken which resulted as follows:
Mr. John Mulholland:
Cllr. Peter Keane:
11 Votes (Cllr. B. Cameron; Cllr. P. Conneely; Cllr M. Cubbard;
Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. P. Flannery; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D.
McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis; Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. J.
Walsh)
6 Votes (Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. M. Farrell and Cllr. A. Marley.)
The nomination of Mr. John Mullholland was adopted.
5
The following nominations were made under Item 2 (a) (ii):
(i) Cllr. J. Walsh; Cllr B. Cameron; Cllr. N. Larkin; Ms. Catherine McBride Shields and
Ms. Kerry Sullivan were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy
In favour: 11 Against: 6
The nominations were adopted.
Mr. B. McGrath advised members of progress and recent meetings with the swimming clubs
and to the Mr. Gar Holohan peer review report circulated to members in advance of the
meeting.
It was proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell that the members would
hear from Mr. Holohan who was in attendance in the Chamber. This was agreed by the
members.
Mr. Holohan introduced himself to the members and outlined his background in leisure
centre management. Mr. Holohan thanked the swimming clubs representatives and Council
staff for efforts in reaching a solution to the issues and for meeting him as part of his work.
The key findings from the report were outlined including background and context to the
current issue; pricing comparisons with other pools; the position of the aquatic clubs; the
investment from Galway City Council; programming issues and swimming lesson
programmes. 4 recommendations were outlined in the report on the following areas:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Pricing, including prices for off-peak early morning training sessions be reduced to
€10 per hour per lane. It was also recommended that the Council provide a grant of
€6,750 to facilitate a reduction in peak time lane hire from €30 to €22.50 per hour.
Swimming lessons programme and proposals to operate lessons for a 3 year period
be invited immediately;
Organisational / Business review to be undertaken to identify best option for the
Company to optimise its potential viability into the future
Implications of the Companies Act 2014 and the role of Board members to act in the
interest of the Shareholders (Galway City Council).
Following Mr Holohan's report a debate on the issues followed with contributions from the
majority of members. Members thanked Mr. Holohan for engaging with the clubs and the
following issues were raised; price reductions proposed in comparison to previous prices;
usage and times assigned for lessons; the need to consider all the facilities at Leisureland
into the future including lands adjacent and the hall; the response of the swimming clubs to
the recommendations; the requirement for a reporting mechanism from the Board back to
the Council; whether it was fair to subsidise club members at others expense; the need for
the Board to have final say in the running of the facility; request that a master plan for the
facility be developed. Mr. Holohan and Mr. McGrath clarified the matters raised by the
6
members and noted the requirement to find a balance between the needs of the clubs and
the commercial requirements of the Council. Mr. Holohan noted that no formal reply from
the swimming clubs had been received but he felt they were generally agreeable to the
recommendations. It was also stated that decisions on the recommendations would be
required sooner rather than later given various contractual commitments that existed.
Clarification in relation to Companies Act requirements of Board members was also
provided.
A motion proposed by Cllr. P. Flannery and seconded by Cllr. N McNelis was submitted;
t' That Galway City b Council adopt the recommendations made by Mr. Gar Holohan in line
with the 'Leisureland and Galway Aquatic Clubs peer Review Report — June 2015' as
presented.
The detail is as follows:
I) Charge per early morning lane hour be as per report recommendations set at €10
per lane per hour with a minimum of four lanes being on offer during training
periods from 5am to 8am pro-rata seven days per week.
2) Charge per lane hour per evening be fixed at 22.50 per hour pro rata with a minimum
of three lanes being on offer at any time 5pm to 8pm giving two 1.5 hour sessions
from Monday to Friday or alternatively 6 lanes from 5.45pm to 7.15pm.
3) Costs set at €120 per hour for the full main pool from 8-9pm up to three nights per
week and €100 pro rata from 9pm to close
4) Weekends to be held in line with the recommendations outlined within the report
and detailed below.
Saturday:
Early morning 05:00 until 07:00 — 6 lanes @ €10 per hour per lane
Early morning 07 until 08:00 — 4 lanes @ €10 per hour per lane (2 lanes for members / public)
08:00 until 09:30 — 3 lanes @ CIO per hour per lane (pool shared with general public)
18:00 to close full main pool @ €100 per hour for the full main pool.
Sunday:
Early morning 06:00 until 07:00 — 6 lanes @ €10 per hour per lane
Early morning 07 until 09:00 — 4 lanes @ €10 per hour per lane (2 lanes for members / public)
17:00 to close full main pool @ €100 per hour
This proposal is made on the understanding that it is implicitly understood that the
aquatic clubs involved would provide all necessary lifeguarding services themselves and
indemnify Galway City Council from any claims or responsibilities occurring from this
agreement".
Cllr. Flannery stated that he was mandated by the swimming clubs to propose the motion
and they were satisfied with the recommendations of the Holohan report subject to a
number of minor modifications. Mayor Donal Lyons complimented Mr. Holohan for the
report and efforts to resolve the issues. Mr McGrath CE also thanked Mr. Holohan for the
report and recommended to the members to consider it carefully in that it offered a
7
balanced set of proposals. Mr. McGrath commended the clubs for their engagement in the
process and noted that the report provided a good insight into all the competing issues
affecting Leisureland now and into the future. It was also noted that the report reflected
what clubs could feasibly afford and provided the opportunity for the Council to reduce and
eliminate the deficit over time.
Mr. McGrath acknowledged conflicting perspectives and noted that he would take a
proactive role with the new Board going forward, the issue of the wider Leisureland facility
including hall would have to be examined and a report would be prepared for the members
in due course on the importance of getting a vibrant and active programme back in place.
Cllr. D. McDonnell noted that as the new Board had not yet met that time was required for
the Board to consider the report and its recommendations. It was suggested that the new
Board would meet at the earliest opportunity and that the Chief Executive and Mr. Holohan
would make themselves available to attend to present the full report. Following this, a
further update to the July Council meeting would be considered.
Cllr. McDonald proposed an amendment to the motion submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery which
was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and agreed by the members that;
"The Board of Galway Salthill Féilte Ltd meet to consider the Holohan Report and report
back to the July meeting of Council".
At 6.35pm Mayor Lyons departed the meeting to attend a separate Mayoral function and
was replaced in the Chair by Deputy Mayor Cllr. J. Walsh.
(b)
Section 183 — Disposal of Leasehold Interest at Galway Airport to Carnmore
Aviation Ltd
Mr. L. Hanrahan A/SEO referred to statutory notice pursuant to Section 183 of the Local
Government Act 2001, and intention to offer for lease the lands and premises which
compromise of the site formerly known as Galway Airport at Carnmore, Co. Galway, to
Carnmore Aviation Ltd. The lease will facilitate:
the operation of the Aviation License held by Carnmore Aviation Ltd. for the site
until December 2015
the continuation of the existing arrangements with the Galway Flying Club
the completion of an Expression of Interest process on the use of the site
the completion of the Feasibility Study for the future economic development of
the site, in line with the EOI.
Cllr. F. Fahy queried the term of the lease and the proposed lessee which were clarified by
Mr. Hanrahan. Cllr P. Keane queried the date of incorporation of Carnmore Aviation Ltd. to
which Mr. Hanrahan stated he would ascertain and advise. Cllr. Ö Conchüir queried the
status of the fire service at the airport and Mr. McGrath CE noted that a different
8
requirement was now in place pursuant to the aviation licence. Mr. McGrath also stated
that the feasibility study into the facility was pending and it would be a matter for the
members of the City Council and County Council to consider future use of the facility on foot
of the report. It was stated that Carnmore Aviation Ltd will operate all facilities at the
Airport.
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron the S.183 wa
approved by the members.
(c) To Approve Draft Annual Repon of Galway City Council 2014
Ms. E. Ruane A/DOS referred to the Draft Annual Report 2014 circulated to members which
reflected a summary of activities and service indicators in 2014 and recommended its
adoption to the members as a reserved function.
n the proposal of Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy the 2014 Annual Repo
as approved b the members.
(d) Chief Executlve's Report on Galway CIW Development Plan Review
Ms. C. Phelan Senior Planner advised the members that the Planning and Development Act 2000
Section 11, sets out the requirements in relation to the preparation of the Draft City
Development Plan. The first part of this process is the consultation stage which invites
submissions relating to what might be the appropriate objectives and policies to include in
the Draft Development Plan.
The Planning Authority is required to specifically canvass the views of the general public
through public notice and to request the Minister, Northern and Western Regional Assembly,
prescribed authorities, adjoining authorities and the Board, to submit their views also. In
addition, the process includes for the use of a range of consultation measures to capture the
views of relevant stakeholders and to encourage a response from the general public. The
legislation requires that 16 weeks after the notification of the public consultation the Chief
Executive prepares a Report for the Council Members informing them of the details of the
submissions /observations received.
The Chief Executive's (CE) Report is required to list the persons/bodies who made
submissions/observations or who were consulted by the Council; to summarise the issues
raised; to give the opinion of the Chief Executive regarding the issues raised and to make
recommendations regarding policies that may be included in the Draft Development Plan.
The CE Report is required to specifically summarise the issues and recommendations made
by the Northern and Western Regional Assembly and to outline how these should be
addressed in the Draft Development Plan.
9
Following consideration of the CE Report, the Member's of the Council may issue directions
to the Chief Executive regarding the preparation of the Draft Development Plan. Any
direction issued is indicated in legislation to need to be of a strategic nature, consistent with
the draft core strategy and to take account of the statutory obligations of the local authority
and any relevant government policies or objectives. The Chief Executive is then obliged to
comply with any directions issued. These directions should be given within approximately 10
weeks of the issuing of the report to the Council Members. It is anticipated that the likely
date for giving direction will be mid July.
Ms. Phelan noted that the pre-draft consultation period commenced on the 23rd January
2015 and ran for a period of 8 weeks up to Monday 23rd March 2015. Advertisements were
placed in local newspapers, local radio and on the Council's website inviting written
submissions/observations from the public and interested parties. Notification of intention
to review and prepare a Draft Development Plan was also given to the bodies that are
prescribed as consultees under the Planning Act (see Appendix I).
An Issues Paper and leaflets entitled 'Guide to making a Development Plan' and 'Making a
Submission to the Development Plan' were prepared and made available at the planning
office, libraries, Knocknacarra Community Centre, Renmore Sports Centre and on the
Council's website. A press release giving information on the Development Plan review was
circulated to local newspapers. These documents were designed to inform the public and all
interested groups on the process of making the plan and in relation to the issues that the
plan will consider.
Public Consultation Sessions were organised at different neighbourhoods throughout the
City to facilitate the public and to maximise the dissemination of information in order to
encourage participation. Information was made available at these consultation sessions and
included the Issues Paper and leaflets, a selection of Maps, comments sheets and templates
for making a submission. Visual displays of information dealing with the Development Plan
process and the contents of a Development Plan which were highly accessible and user
friendly were also exhibited. This format included for opportunities for anyone who
attended to discuss issues directly with planning staff that were in attendance for the entire
display duration. The sessions demonstrated that the nature of issues raised by attendees
was similar to the issues raised in the written submissions.
In addition, to broaden the opportunities for public consultation a weekly drop—in clinic with
planning officials was made available in City Hall. This also provided information on the
Development Plan and assistance in making submissions where needed. Throughout the
consultation period information and advice was also available from the general planning
office.
A range of consultation meetings was also organized with key stakeholders including service
providers to exchange information and include for an opportunity to review what their input
into the plan might be and to update the Planning Authority on their plans and long term
vision. These were discussed in the context of how these plans and policies could have a
10
bearing on the making of the next Development Plan. This process is still ongoing and also
includes for internal consultation within the City Council departments and with the adjoining
authority Galway County Council.
A total of 59 written submissions were received. Appendix 2 of the Report sets out the list
of those persons / bodies that made written submissions. All submissions have been
considered as part of the report. To facilitate full information on the submissions a digital
copy has been distributed to all the Council Members. In addition for the benefit of access,
all submissions are available to view on www.galwaycity.ie and at the Planning Office.
A number of queries were raised by members including; whether there were any significant
changes proposed; the prominence of submissions on transport issues; timescale for
consideration of zoning issues as part of the process. The issues raised were clarified by Ms.
Phelan.
A briefing session with members was agreed for July to discuss the report in detail. This
date was agreed by the members. The matter will be listed for consideration at the July
meeting of Council also.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3.
Report on Corporate Policy Group Meeting 5th June 2015
(a)
Mr. McGrath CE referred to CPG report issued and to the matter of the Draft Bye-Laws
outlined in the report, noting following initial consideration by the Joint Policing Committee,
proposals to amend the Byelaws on the Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor in Public Place
were presented to the Corporate Policy Group for consideration at its meeting on the
June, 2015. The CPG decided to recommend to the Council that the draft Byelaws be
published and placed on public display in accordance with the statutory provisions outlined
in the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended.
On the proposal of Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis the members agreed
to place the draft byelaws on public display as recommended by the CPG.
Cllr. P. Conneely and a number of members queried the status of the Sword & Mace and
future role in civic events and ceremonies. It was noted that a report on same had
recommended that the Sword & Mace were considered artefacts of national importance and
should no longer be used for such events. Mr. G. McMahon A/SEO noted that the Sword &
Mace are currently housed in the City Museum. The report is to be considered further. Cllr.
A. Marley suggested that new symbols for the city should be considered.
Cllr. P. Connelly raised the issue of non invitation of elected members to attend events
during the recent visit of the Prince of Wales. A discussion on the protocol and
arrangements for the visit was held and Cllr. Conneely expressed the view that elected
11
members should have been invited to the event in NUJG or an invite should have been
sought on their behalf. Mr. McGrath noted the very limited role of the Council in planning
the events and advised that he felt elected members should have received invitations to
events. It was agreed that in future, where events of this nature were planned invites would
be sought for elected members.
Issues where SPC meetings scheduled were clashing with other commitments of members
was raised by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and it was agreed that each SPC would consider and amend
dates if necessary. Cllr. C. Connolly noted difficulty attending scheduled Transport SPC
meetings. Cllr. J Walsh noted that as chair of the Transport SPC he was not aware of any
clash of times until the previous Friday.
Cllr. M. Farrell queried the status of the webcasting report. D. Mahon SEO noted that a
preliminary report on the proposal to webcast and stream Council meetings was outlined
and discussed at the CPG. Members of the CPG discussed and agreed that prior to any
decision to introduce streaming of Council meetings the significant issues of: Procurement of
an appropriate and suitable provider and the costs thereof; staff resource requirement to
operate any system and data protection considerations, webcasting policy and procedures
and the extent of qualified privilege required further consideration and must be determined
and agreed. It was agreed to gather further information on costs, system options and policy
requirements and a report on same prepared for the Procedures Committee.
Cllr. Declan McDonnell outlined concerns in relation to the staffing compliment in the
Housing Department and the impact of recent staff changes / shortages of staff on the
delivery of services.
Cllr. P. Conneely queried whether the 2016 Commemorative Committee should include
elected members and be chaired by the SPC Chair with responsibility for Community &
Culture. Cllr. McNelis also stated that the committee should comprise one member from
each of the political groupings.
It was proposed by Cllr. N. McNelis and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy that an advisory group of
elected members be set up to work with the 2016 Rising Committee and unanimously
agreed by the members.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. J. Walsh that Cllr. P. Conneely be
appointed chair of the 2016 Commemorative Committee.
In Favour: 11
Against: O
Abstain: 3.
The Motion was carried.
At 7.20pm the Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons resumed the Chair.
Cllr. P. Conneely raised the matter of a request previously issued by Cllr. M.J Crowe to
temporality replace Cllr. O. Crowe on the CPG and to email correspondence subsequently
issued to CPG members from Cllr. M.J Crowe. Cllr. Conneely stated that the comment made
12
was unacceptable and his reputation as an elected representative had been damaged as
result. Cllr. Connelly requested that the comment be withdrawn. Mayor Donal Lyons referred
to motion adopted by the CPG requesting the comment be withdrawn. Cllr. MJ Crowe
requested the members to appreciate the context under which the remark was made and
stated that he did not use such remarks lightly, that he did not set out to damage Cllr.
Conneely character but the comment was in response to how he felt at the time in relation
to this specific issue.
Cllr. P. Conneely proposed a motion, seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery that
"Request the withdrawal of the defamatory remark with a full public apology and to
communicate in writing this withdrawal and apology for its use to the same recipients to
whom it was originally issued on the 3rd June"
As the time was now 7.30 pm an extension of time was sought to complete the meeting no
later than 8.45 pm and to hear Item 3 (a) and 4(a). The motion was proposed by Cllr. D.
McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis and unanimously agreed.
Cllr. MJ Crowe advised that he would withdraw the remark and noted he regretted use of
the remark at the time. A number of members stated that they were satisfied that this
constituted a withdrawal of the remark and an apology to Cllr. Conneely.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4.
Chief Executive's Report for June 2015
(a)
The following areas were queried by the members; status of GTS, Galway Bike week
proposals and support for cycling in the city; water metre installation programme in the city;
reply from Minister on motion submitted on the issue of suicide prevention; extent of lands
zoned for industrial use in Knocknacarra; recent Purple Flag ceremony and Mayors Awards
and acknowledgement of all those who attended and participated.
In reply, Mr. McGrath CE noted that the Comedy Festival had requested use of the Spanish
Arch area in October and practical issues were being considered by staff. Mr. McGrath noted
the number of requests to hold events at this location in the September / October period
annually. GTS route selection report was pending for end of June; input by staff into Bike
week and the cycle scheme; the water metering programme was a matter for Irish Water.
(c)
Companies Act 2014
Mr. T. Connell advised the members of the coming into force from the ISt June 2015 of the
Companies Act 2014 which replaces the previous legislation under the same title. The
purpose of the new act is to modernise and simplify company law, reduce administrative
burden on business and to ensure good governance. The changes proposed will affect every
company. In the case of limited companies they will be required to convert to a new
13
company type, being a limited or Designated Activity Company (DAC) model. Mr. Connell
referred to summary details outlined in report issued to members.
All existing private companies currently registered as a Private Company Limited by Shares
can choose to convert to one of the two new company types. The process involves the
passing of a special resolution to amend the company's Memorandum & Articles of
Association and submit these documents together with appropriate forms to the Companies
Office. There is a 15 to 18 month period allowed for the companies of existing private
companies limited by shares to comply with the new legislation. There are other changes
provided for under annual returns, directors age requirement, and duties.
The Companies Act 2014 has direct relevance for Leisureland — Galway Salthill Failte Ltd,
where a copy of the Act and a detailed report will be considered at the first meeting of the
new Board.
Disposal of Royal Tara
Mr. McGrath CE advised members that the s.183 previously issued to members was now
defunct as new owners had acquired an interest. On this basis a revised s.183 had issued to
the members for consideration at the July meeting. It was agreed to defer the Item to the
July Ordinary meeting of Council.
(e)
(g)
(k)
Integrated Transport Management Programme
Deferred
Draft Road Signage Policies
Deferred
European Capital of Culture Bid
Deferred
Ten Year Cultural Policy & Strategy 2016-2025
Deferred
Update on the Sean Duggan Coach Centre at Fairgreen, Galway
Deferred
Ireland West Airport — Knock
Deferred.
Raft at Blackrock
Deferred.
Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015
Deferred.
14
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
NOTICE OF MOTIONS
Deferred
QUESTIONS
None.
CORRESPONDENCE
It was proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed to
note the correspondence listed on the agenda.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Deferred
CONFERENCES
It was proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and unanimously
agreed that the following Councillors attend the conferences/seminars listed below:
VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING
THE MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Connelly and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy to take Item 12 before the
conclusion of the meeting.
Presentation from Challenge Galway
Mr. L. Heavin CEO Challenge Galway provided a comprehensive overview of the proposed
Challenge Galway event scheduled for June 2016. Mr. Heavin introduced the overall concept
of the event; the persons involved; the commitment to legacy; the Challenge timetable and
projected entry numbers; projected profile of participants; the swim, bike and run routes;
15
traffic management and festival plans during the Challenge period. The potential economic
impact of the event on the city was outlined. A number of members thanked Mr. Heavin for
his presentation, offered support for the event and sought clarification on a number of
points raised including; links to Capital of Culture bid, financial cost and request for funding
from Council; importance of Bi-lingual city status to be reflected in the event. In reply, Mr.
Heavin clarified the issues raised including cost of entry for participants, projected costs to
run the overall event and that a formal request for financial support from the City Council
would issue in due course.
A following motion under SO 22 proposed by Cllr. P. Plannery and seconded by 10 members
was considered.
"In line with the recommendations if the Irish Water Safety Risk Assessment commissioned
by Galway City Council in 2015 and recognizing that Irish Water Safety are the only
competent statutory authority mandated to make such recommendations Galway City
Council must reinstate the Raft at Blackrock with immediate effect so as to ensure it is in
place for the summer season 2015"
Mr. McGrath CE advised the members that it may be beyond his remit to adopt the
recommendations from the Motion as he must also consider the report from the Health &
Safety Officer from the Council who advised against reinstatement of the raft. Mr. McGrath
advised that there was no budget available for additional life guards and the IWS was not
the competent authority in relation to the health and safety of staff. Following further
discussion, Cllr. C. Connolly requested that the matter be revisited at the July meeting,
The meeting concluded at 9.00p.m.
16