Presidin :
Present:
In Attendance:
010 ies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 6th July, 2015
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. F. Fahy, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. 6 Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, T. O'Flaherty, P. Flannery, P.
Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, A. Marley; D. McDonnell, N. McNelis; T
O'Flaherty & J. Walsh.
Mr. B.
Ms. E.
Ms. E.
Ms. C.
Ms. S.
Mr. G.
Ms. H.
McGrath, Chief Executive
McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services
Ruane, A/Director of Services
Phelan, A/Director of Services
Mahon, Meetings Administrator
Connolly, Senior Engineer
McMahon A/Senior Officer
Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. S. Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Presentation by Galway United
Mayor Fahy welcomed Mr. B. O'Connell and Mr. J. Flannery from Galway utd FC and invited•them to
deliver their presentation. The presentation provided an overview on a number of areas including:
history and achievements of the club, current objectives, development of facilities, bi-lingual policies
in place at the grounds, overall economic contribution of the club to the city, marketing and
promotion activities, development of soccer in the city and county, support and initiatives for the
ECOC bid, vision for the club going forward and planed international Celtic Football Festival in 2020.
Mayor Fahy thanked the contributors for the presentation and invited comment from the members.
The majority of members welcomed and thanked Mr. O'Connell and Mr. Flannery for the
presentation and work to develop sport in the city, stating that the city was well served by the club
and that recent funding provided to the club was well utilised. Members also welcomed the planned
football festival in 2020. Mr. O'Connell and Mr. Flannery replied to a number of queries from the
members and acknowledged the support from City Council.
Mayor Fahy proposed a minutes' silence which was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty in memory of the
victims of the Berkeley balcony tragedy, the Irish citizens who died in Tunisia, Ms. Judith O'Grady
mother of Ms. Rosie Webb Senior Executive Architect, Mr. Finbar Clabby, brother of Carmel Clabby
ICT Unit, Phil Carey Moyola Park and to those refugees who have perished recently in the
Mediterranean sea.
1
Mayor Fahy proposed that the quarterly reports would be deferred to the next meeting. This was
agreed by all members. It was also agreed to take item 2(d) first on the agenda.
Item 2. (d) Material Contravention — Proposal for a Material Contravention of Galway
City Development Plan 2011-17 under Section 34(6) of the Planning &
Development Act 2000 (as amended) to facilitate a Primary School in the
Knocknacarra area Pl.Ref No 15/11
Ms. Caroline Phelan Senior Planner drew the members attention to Chief Executive's Report dated 3rd
June 2015 setting out a proposal for a Material Contravention of Galway City Development Plan
2011-17 under Section 34(6) of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) to facilitate a
Primary School in the Knocknacarra area Pl. Ref No 15 / 11 issued to members.
A number of queries were raised by the members and subsequently addressed by Ms. Phelan
including; clarification on recommended conditions No. 5 and No. 8, potential impact of use of
adjoining playing pitches, the requirement for a Mobility Management Plan, size of the site and
proportion of site encroaching into the industrial zoned area.
The Material Contravention was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis and
following a roll call vote was adopted.
The roll call vote was as follows:
In attendance: 18 members
Cllrs, B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M.
In Favour:
Cubbard, T. O'Flaherty, F, Fahy, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, A. Marley; D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, T. O'Flaherty & J. Walsh.
Against:
Nil.
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
1.
(b) Minutes of Statutory Annual Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 15th
June 2015
Proposed:
Cllr. B. Cameron
Matters of Accuracy:
Matters Arising:
Seconded:
Cllr. M. Cubbard
None
Cllr. O. Crowe thanked the Mayor for his welcome to the meeting and wished the Mayor well in the
coming term. Mayor Fahy thanked the members for their support on the evening of his election to
the office of Mayor and read out a letter received from the Mayor of Chicago welcoming the election
of Mayor Fahy. The Mayor also noted recent communication with the Mayor of Menlo Park USA and
Mayor of Seattle offering congratulations on his election.
2
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday June, 2015
Proposed:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded:
Cllr. B. Cameron
Matters of Accuracy:
Matters Arising:
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. B. Cameron
Cllr. P. Flannery
Cllr. C. Connolly
Cllr. P. Keane
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Cllr. M, Farrell
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Cllr. A. Marley
Cllr. M. Cubbard
Cllr. P. Conneely
None
The following issues were raised under Matters Arising;
Update on Brown doorway and responsible dog ownership signage
Update on Greenways
Update on Leisureland board meeting and his motion from the June
meeting.
Update on South Park and query when report will be ready, P. O'.
Connaire statue, Wolfe Tone Bridge, appointment of Irish Language
Officer, funding for housing capital programme.
Update on webcasting proposal, funding for Taylor's Hill
improvement works, Lough Atalia works and consultation process,
Consumption of Alcohol bye-laws and submission deadlines.
Staffing levels in the Housing Unit and update from Department on
staffing request, clarification on funding for additional housing units
at Ballymoneen Rd.
Clarification on funding for additional housing at Ballymoneen Rd.
Update on staffing request for community centres.
Update on Mayola Park water contamination report
Update on staffing matters in the Housing Unit
Reference to previous comments from Cllr, MJ Crowe in re'ation to
at Cllr Conneely and the damage caused to his reputation,
embarrassment suffered and his standing in the community. Cllr.
Conneely queried whether any sanction could be brought against
Cllr. Crowe noting his previous request for the comment to be
withdrawn in writing has not been received.
Replies were given by the Chief Executive and Directors of Service including; a report on the Brown
doorway is being prepared and will issue to members on completion; proposed greenway
developments in the city and county were outlined; Leisureland Board had met and adopted the
Holohan report and a meeting with the clubs was proposed to consider further; South Park master
plan will be well advanced by September and funding for same reflected in the draft 2016 budget;
recent meeting with Minister was noted and update on staffing requests outlined; intention to
commence 14 units at Ballymoneen Rd; Taylor's Hill works may be included in 2016 budget allocation
if no funding can be sourced nationally; Lough Atalla works and reinstatement of two way flow and
report on same for September meeting of Council to include analysis of data from trial period,
3
staffing update and recent sanction to recruit Senior Engineer for Housing Capital received; budget
implications of recruiting additional staff for Recreation and Amenity centres; report on Mayola Park
issued to members previously; Wolfe Tone Bridge issues clarified; temporary appointment of Irish
Language Officer noted; submission deadline for Bye-laws noted; update on commencement of
additional housing staff; update on P. O' Connaire statue and request for tender noted, location in
Eyre Square not yet determined.
In reply to Cllr. Conneely's comment, Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath stated his belief that the remark
issued towards Cllr. Conneely was inappropriate and wrong. Mr. McGrath requested that members
adhere to the protocols and conventions in place but stated that he had no control over what an
elected member may say.
A number of points of clarification were raised and addressed including staff requests and budget
implications.
Cllr. Connelly referred to his motion as noted in the June Council meeting minutes regarding the
comment issued from Cllr. MJ Crowe and sought consideration of the motion by the members. Cllr.
MJ Crowe stated that the remark was not made in a public forum and it wasn't his intention for it to
be made public. He stated that he had withdrawn the remark and offered an apology to Cllr.
Conneely at the June Council meeting and considered the matter dealt with.
Cllr. P. Conneely proposed a motion, seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery that:
"Request the withdrawai ot the defamatory remark with a full public apology and to communicate in
writing this withdrawal and apology for its use to the same recipients to whom it was originally
issued on the 3rd June"
In Favour: 11 Against: 3 Abstain: 3 Absent: 1
The motion was carried.
On a point of order, Cllr. C. Connolly stated that the remark Cllr. Conneely had taken exception to was
being repeatedly uttered by Cllr. Connelly in the Chamber and that that in itself was regrettable and
inappropriate. Cllr. MJ Crowe stated that he respected the democratic process and outcome of the
vote on the motion and will respect the motion adopted by the members. During the debate on the
motion, Mayor Fahy repeatedly called for respect from all members and advised of this intention to
suspend the meeting if this respect was not adhered to.
2.
(a)
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 and Section 211 of the Local
Government (Planning & development) Act, 2000 Disposal of lands at Connolly
Avenue Mervue Galway to Welroyal Property Ltd.
On the proposal of Cllr. B. Cameron it was agreed by the all the members to defer the item until the
September meeting, pending receipt of a heritage report on Tara Hall.
Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath advised that a report would be issued but that the Section 183 notice
could
4
not be inter-linked with the heritage report. Ms. C. Phelan Senior Planner advised members that a
heritage report had been prepared as part of the planning application and this would be circulated to
members for information. Cllr. D. McDonnell sought clarification as to whether the new owners
were in negotiations with the Council in relation to proposals for Tara Hall. Mr. McGrath advised
members that the new owners had issued correspondence to Council seeking to engage on the
preservation and protection of Tara Hail.
(b)
Chief Executive's Report on City Development Plan Review
Ms. C. Phelan Senior Planner introduced the Chief Executive's Report on the pre-draft City
Development Plan Consultation Process under the Planning and Development Acts 2000 — 2013 and
the Review of the Galway City Development Plan 2011 — 2017 and preparation of Draft Development
Plan 2017 - 2023.
Ms. Phelan noted that the Report had been discussed initially at the June Councii meeting and an
information briefing had taken place with some members on July ISt and Planning staff had met some
members who could not attend the briefing. The briefing sought to clarify the role of the elected
member in the Development Plan process and to emphasise the policy making role of the members
and to clarify the stages of the process.
Ms. Phelan outlined the main content of the Report and noted 57 submissions were received. In
addition, Ms. Phelan stated that the requirement on members at this point in the process was to
provide further direction on policy if deemed necessary and appropriate. Ms. Phelan drew the
members' attention to the 17 aims and objectives and the 72 policies outlined in the Report.
At 6.30 pm Mayor Fahy departed the meeting to attend another function and Cllr. N. McNelis Deputy
Mayor took the Chair.
A number of queries were raised by members including period oftime for adoption of the report, the
status of light rail in the Plan, provision for adequate housing and sociai housing under Plan
objectives, universal accessibility objectives. Each query was responded to by Ms. Phelan.
The members noted the Chief Executive's Report.
(C) Western Catchment Flood Risk Assessment & Management (CFRAM)
The Chief Executive welcomed Ms. Elizabeth Russell from JBA Consulting / OPW to the meeting to
provide a briefing to members on the CFRAM. Ms. Russell provided a detailed presentation including
the CFRAM process, assessments underway and completed to date, model extents, the optioneering
process, mufti-criteria analysis, consideration of climate change, continued monitoring of flood risk,
comments on flood maps and how to get involved in the consultation process. Ms. Russell referred
to planned consultation event in September and outlined timelines for completion of the report.
A number of members spoke and thanked Ms. Russell for her presentation. Queries raised were
addressed by Ms. Russell and included, issues with planning permission on flood plains, inclusion of
global warming and climate change in the report, flooding concerns at certain locations in the city,
scheduling of consultation events. In reply, Ms. Russell advised that the consultation process had
commenced in 2011 and since then a data gathering / mapping exercise had been undertaken to
include topography modelling and flood risk mapping. Details on options for the city will be prepaæd
by end of 2015 for finalisation in QI 2016. Funding for preferred options would then be ranked in
5
order to determine priorities by the OPW A minor works fund would be established and significant
works in excess of c.€O.5m would be included in the Plan. The members were encouraged to
participate in the consultation event in September once dates were announced.
3.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
4.
(a)
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Chief Executive's Report for July 2015
Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath referred to July CE Report and invited queries from the members.
Queries and issues raised included; rates income to date and whether a budget revision would be
required; LPT consultation process, Socio-Economic workshop held recently, the local government
boundary review and dates set to meet the Commission, national day of commemoration and need
to publicise.
Members noted the importance of the strategy to prevent and reduce alcohol related harm
published by the HSE and the potential links between the strategy and the draft consumption of
alcohol bye-laws. Members noted that Galway was one of the first cities to prepare such a plan and a
discussion took place on the availability of alcohol generally and its detrimental effects. The closure
of the treatment unit in Merlin Park was also discussed.
In reply, the Chief Executive and Directors of Service provided clarification on the issues raised
including anticipated rates income, arrears collection levels and procedures in place and LPT public
consultation timelines. Mr. McGrath reiterated his appeal to local businesses to engage with the City
Council on rates arrears and payment plans advising if budgeted income was not receipted corrective
action to the 2015 revenue budget may be required. Clarification was provided on the local
government boundary commission and additional layer of consultation and dates for same advised
to members. The ECOC workshop with members scheduled for July 8th was noted and members
attendance requested. Mr. McGrath noted potential budget implications of the bid and alluded to
the decisions that will be required during preparation of draft budget 2016.
Mr. McGrath advised members that a challenging work programme lay ahead and a list of agenda
items to be dealt with from September to December 2015 would issue to members in early
September. This programme will include meetings to address City Development Plan, Budget 2016,
ECOC bid and various strategy documents to be adopted including cultural, arts, heritage, economic,
marketing and branding, etc.
On the proposal of Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly the members voted
unanimously on the following motion:
"That Galway City Council condemn the decision of the HSE to not rebuild the Treatment centre at
Merlin Park following a Fire in 2013. This Treatment Centre is needed in the city to support alcohol
and drug treatment"
6
Integrated Transport Management Programme
Ms. Sharon Connolly Senior Engineer provided an overview of the proposed Integrated Transport
Management Programme for Galway City in order to achieve an integrated sustainable solution to
traffic and transport issues. Issues covered during the presentation included smarter travel proposals
and impact on pedestrians, cydists and public transport.
As the time was now 7.30 Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed an extension of time which was seconded by
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and agreed by the members to take Items 4 (b), 4(i) and 4(m) on the agenda.
The basis for the Programme was outlined and the need to amalgamate various policies and studies
completed into one coherent programme for the city by the end of 2015. Improvements delivered to
date and currently being delivered were outlined including junction upgrades, development of cycle
lanes, bike rental scheme, park & stride, greenway proposals, pedestrianisation, bus shelter
improvements etc. Public transport improvements were also outlined and overall objectives to
ensure optimum use and access to bus services noted.
NTA analysis of existing transport routes and demand analysis for public transport was also outlined.
Ms. Connolly outlined the next steps in the process including discussion with the NTA on options and
funding, bus network improvement options, parking management, corporate mobility planning and
30kph zones. It was stated that the city centre needs relief from traffic and another river crossing is
required.
A number of contributions were made by the members who welcomed the report including; the
importance of public transport for the city, bus shelter provision and specifications, recent traffic
management issues associated with games in Pearse Stadium, requirement for sustainable transport
solutions generally, extension of bike scheme, implementation of walking and cycling strategies
previously developed, light rail options for the city and request to examine other models in operation
in Europe, school transport issues and requirement for solutions.
At 7.35 pm Mayor Fahy resumed the Chair.
Issues with Eglinton Street were discussed and it was stated that the street had been neglected in
recent years and needed review; bus linkages east- west and Bus Eireann plans for school transport
were raised; funding required to deliver projects proposed the requirement to review Kirwin
roundabout to be addressed and the overall need to consider the needs of the city at large when
planning transport solutions was noted.
In reply, Ms. Connolly provided responses and ciarification on the issues outlined by the members
including commitment to consider retrofitting some bus shelters to provide seating, traffic
management issues at Pearse Stadium and liaison with An Garda Siochana in advance of the game,
consideration of rapid transit corridor, discussions with NTA on extension of the bike scheme,
consideration of Eglinton St as part of overall programme, possible locations for park and ride to
encourage links to public transport or sustainable transport options and increase in bus usage in the
city in recent years. Ms. Connolly agreed to review traffic management plans when events were
taking place in Pearse Stadium to avoid the repeat of recent problems.
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Cubbard and seconded by Cllr. P. Keane the members voted unanimously
on the following motion:
7
"We proposes that the Bus Eireann School Bus Division attend the September 2015 meeting of
Galway City Council to discuss the current and future services provided by Bus Eireann to our city
schools"
(b)
Christmas in Galway 2015
Mayor Fahy welcomed Mr. Anthony Ryan and Ms. Aine Feeney from the Galway City Centre Business
Association who delivered a presentation on their proposals for Christmas in Galway 2015. Among
the issues outlined in the presentation were: proposal to run the event at different locations in the
city, including; Eyre Square, City Library, Spanish Arch, Harbour area, Lombard St, Woodquay, Eyre
Square Shopping Centre and at the Town Hali Theatre, building on the lessons from previous
Christmas markets in Eyre Square, the overall economic benefit to the city from the event, objectives
going forward to increase footfall and visitor spend in the city, a focus on quality traders,
entertainment and ambiance.
A number of members spoke to thank Ms. Feeney and Mr. Ryan for the presentation and to offer
support for the event in 2015 as outlined in the presentation. Among the issues raised and clarified
by Ms. Feeney and Mr. Ryan included: desire for additional craft stalls and better balance between
food and craft stalls; overall management of the event and appointment process for event
management company; role of commercial providers and multi-national companies in the event; the
overall economic contribution of the event to the city and benefits of same, benefits of locating
events around the city and the merits of the locations selected; impact of food stalls on eateries in
the city and inclusion of a multi-lingual sign welcoming customers to the market. Members also
queried the sum payable to the City Council and when improvements to the Square would be
commenced.
As the time was now 8.30 pm a proposal for the extension of time to deal with Item 4 (m) and (i) was
proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and unanimously agreed.
In reply, Mr. Ryan and Ms. Feeney provided clarification on the issues raised and noted the intention
to immediately re-sod those parts of Eyre Square that may be used for the event in 2015 and to use
less grass space in the Square than in previous years. A good balance of stalls was planned for 2015
and it was noted that the HSA had inspected the site in 2014 and were satisfied that all requirements
had been met. Mr. Ryan and Ms. Feeney advised that no contract for the management / operation
of the event in 2015 was in place at this time and the GCCBA would take on board the comments
from the members in planning this year event. Mr. Ryan and Ms. Feeney acknowledged the support
from the City Council and noted that the locations proposed for the 2015 had yet to be fully
confirmed and a license application would be submitted to the Council in due course to stage the
event.
Mayor Fahy thanked Mr. Ryan and Ms. Feeney for their attendance and for the presentation to the
members.
(d) Draft Road Signage Policies
Deferred
8
(e)
(g)
European Capital of Culture Bid
Deferred
Ten Year Cultural Policy & Strategy 2016-2025
Deferred
Update on the Sean Duggan Coach Centre at Fairgreen, Galway
Deferred
Ireland West Airport — Knock
Deferred
Raft at Blackrock
Mr. McGrath C.E. noted recent discussion with Cllr. P. Flannery where the reasons why it was not
possible to reinstate the raft on health and safety grounds were outlined. Mr. McGrath advised the
members that he had engaged a third party to work with Irish Water Safety and the Council to
attempt to resolve the issues in order that consideration can be given to reinstate the raft in 2016.
(m)
Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015
Deferred
ArtHouse Cinema Report
Deferred
Sailin to Silverstrand Coastal Protection Scheme
Deferred
Draft Bio-Diversity Plan
Mr. Stephen Walsh Senior Executive Parks Superintendent present the draft Bio-Diversity Plan for
consideration and adoption by the members and advised that each Local Authority is tasked with the
preparation of a Local Biodiversity Action Plan as an action under Ireland's National Biodiversity
Action Plan which was first adopted in 2002. Mr. Walsh advised members that that the purpose of a
Biodiversity Action Plan is to tdentif„l sources and compile information in relation to the local
biodiversity of an area, to set out a framework with a series of actions to protect local biodiversity, to
raise awareness of biodiversity, its importance; why it is important on a local and global level and to
encourage the involvement of all stakeholders to protect and enhance it for future generations.
The preparation of the National Biodiversity Action Plan is part of Ireland's commitment to the
'Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The CBD is a key part of the Global agreements made by
many governments including Ireland at the United Nations Conference on the Environment and
9
Development known since as the 'Earth Summit' in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. It is a globally
binding treaty with three main goals: - the conservation of biological diversity; the sustainable use of
its components, and the Fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic
resources,
Mr. Walsh advised members that the draft policy is set out under a number of key headings and
subjects aimed at as many stakeholders as possible: -The importance of Biodiversity in general; The
Biodiversity contained in Galway City's Administrative Area; The legislative Frameworks Involved;
Threats to Biodiversity in Galway City; Aims and Objective of the Galway City Biodiversity Action Plan;
Habitat Types and Designations Found in the Galway City Area; How we can work locally to protect
and enhance our Local Biodiversity; The Action Plan — (the engine of the plan!)
The plan covers the entire land area of Galway City, both Private and Public Space although there
will be site specific projects in areas such as Coastal areas, Woodlands, Wetlands etc., the plan aims
to influence all stakeholders to make improvements in their immediate area to affect local change
and thereby affect citywide, National and Global Change. The draft policy has undergone a
consultation and discussion process through the Strategic Policy Committee for Environment,
Recreation & Amenity where it was approved for presentation to the full Council. Mr. Walsh
recommended the draft policy for approval and advised that it will be further updated (note
specifically the date changes) and translated into Irish, The Policy will come into effect from Autumn
2015 - until 2025.
A number of members spoke and complimented Mr. Walsh and his team for their work in the
preparation of the draft policy and raised a number of queries which Mr. Walsh responded to.
Mayor Fahy welcomed the report and referred to works being undertaken at various locations in the
city including Merlin and Barna Woods and complimented conservation volunteers in the city for
their work. The issue of staff resources was discussed and Mr. McGrath advised that resources would
be considered alongside all the resource requirements of the organisation.
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis the members unanimously
agreed to adopt the Bio-Diversity Action Plan for Galway City .
(n)
5.
6.
Quarterly Reports for Quarter Ending 30th June, 2015— Reports
Environment
Recreation & Amenity
Housing
(iv) Transportation
Community, Culture & Economic Development
Deferred
NOTICE OF MOTIONS
Deferred
QUESTIONS
A reply to a question submitted by Cllr. Connolly (Q6-2015) was issued to Councillors.
10
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
CORRESPONDENCE
It was proposed by Cllr. N. McNelis and seconded by Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir and unanimously
agreed to note the correspondence listed on the agenda.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Deferred
CONFERENCES
It was proposed by Cllr. B. Cameron and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and unanimously
agreed that the following Councillors attend the conferences/seminars listed below:
Environment Ireland Conference 2015
The following Councillor were nominated to attend:
Cllr. D. McDonnell.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Tom Collins (RIP)
Votes of Congratulations:
Galway Minor Football Team on reaching the Connacht Minor Football Final.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING
THE MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
A motion proposed under SO 22 from Cllr. B. Cameron and seconded by Cllrs., N. McNelis, M.
Cubbard, F. Fahy, D. McDonnell, P. Flannery, J. Walsh, T. O'Flaherty, P. Conneely, D. Lyons and N.
Larkin was unanimously agreed by the members;
"That Galway City Council calls on Bus Eireann / Irish Rail to return the Eamon Ceannt Plaque to its
original position on the facade of Ceannt Station"
The meeting concluded at 9.30p.m.
11
