Minutes of the Ordinary February Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 8th February, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
K. Moloney, Assistant Planner
E. Fanning, A/Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Rohan, Administrative Officer
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. C.
Mr. G.
Ms. A.
Ms. G.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting including Mr. Declan Smyth, as new temporary Head
of Finance in Galway City Council. Mayor Cubbard requested that item 3(a) be considered after
item I(a). This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th January 2021 and adjournment meetings
held on 18th and 25th January 2021
The Mayor invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty sought clarification on the matter of a potential expansion of the Galway-Mayo
Institute of Technology into Murrough lands and its non-inclusion in the Annual Service Plan.
Cllr. D. Lyons sought clarification on his motion passed to expedite affordable housing and that a
letter issue from Council to the Minister. Cllr. D. McDonnell had seconded this motion and added
1
that input should be considered from the Strategic Policy Committee regarding the Bill including
financial figures.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to her request for a map and a list of all lands zoned 'Recreation and
Amenity' throughout the city including suburbs and estates. She confirmed that she received a
map but not all the detail she required is on same. She added that she requested reports on zebra
mussel and Japanese knotweed and an investigation and a report into alleged contamination to a
stream in Merlin Woods.
The Chief Executive noted matters raised and responded to queries. He confirmed that reports as
requested will be provided to Cllr. C. Connolly.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th January 2021 and
adjournment meetings held on 18th and 25th January 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor Cubbard discussed the running order of the agenda.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
To consider item 3(a) and then 4(c). This was agreed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Minutes from Procedures Committee Meeting held on Friday 22nd January 2020
3(a) Minutes from Procedures Committee Meeting held on Friday 22nd January 2020 were
noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(c) Response to Wastewater Issues
The Chief Executive suggested that the document be taken as read or alternatively it could be
presented by Water Services & Environment representatives. Councillors agreed to take the
document as read.
Mayor Cubbard invited Councillors to speak on the matter.
Councillors discussed the report and individual matters raised included lack of consultation by An
Taisce with the City Council and that the report was accusatory in nature, query as to when the
City Council became aware of discharge occurring in the Claddagh area, what are high levels of
bacteria in water samples attributed to, Grattan Road, Long Walk, quantities of discharge and if it
is being measured, contradiction of Green Coast award to Galway City Council and findings of the
report, accountability, acknowledgement of works completed by the Council and proposed
2
bathing facilities at Ballyloughane, timescale for improvements, testing process outside of bathing
period, any potential issues including costs, capacity at Mutton Island treatment plant, servicing
of the Ardaun area including pump station and refusal of planning application citing issue of
wasterwater, the compilation of the An Taisce report and if it was referred to the local committee,
infrastructure issues at Monivea Park and McHugh avenue and horse and dog faeces entering
water.
The Chief Executive referred to the full Report presented to Council regarding the servicing of the
Ardaun area at the September Ordinary Council meeting.
Senior Engineers, Ms. E. Fanning and Ms. C. Kilcoyne went through the report and responded to
queries raised by Councillors. Ms. Kilcoyne displayed a map of the Ballyloughane area and outlined
the works completed to date which has led to improvement of water quality. It was clarified that
contamination was related to overflows from storm water during peak rainfall.
Ms. Fanning informed the meeting of a Greater Galway Drainage Study underway by Irish Water,
which includes for projected growth and development in Galway. She confirmed that a Feasibility
Report is being conducted and that she will bring back the programme on same to Council. She
referred to workshops that are conducted by Irish Water where concerns may be raised by
Councillors. She confirmed that works at Monivea Road have been approved to commence this
year and automated flushing valves are being installed at McHugh Avenue.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'That any discharge not permitted under licence would be included in quarterly reports to Council
The Chief Executive advised that a Water Services quarterly report is not produced but that a
mechanism will be agreed so that the spirit of the motion will be actioned.
This was agreed.
Mayor Cubbard queried as to how Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations are administered.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator advised that Councillors are currently e-mailing votes of
sympathy/congratulations to Corporate Services with a Seconder to their requests.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To note Agenda item 7. Correspondence
To approve Agenda Item 9. Conferences
To approve Agenda Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations
This was agreed.
3
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Agenda Item 7, correspondence were noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 11th December 2020 received from Waterford City & County Council.
(b) Correspondence dated 17th December 2020 received from Galway County Council.
(c) Correspondence dated 7th January 2021 received from Wexford County Council.
(d) Correspondence dated 20th January 2021 received from Senator Robbie Gallagher.
(e) Correspondence dated 26th January 2021 received from Galway County Council.
(f) Commission on the Defence Forces — Public Consultation.
9. CONFERENCES
Agenda Item 9, Conferences were approved.
1. Title: Ireland's Housing Conference 2021
Date: 21st January 2021
Venue: Online
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
•
•
•
•
•
•
Cllr. N.
Helen Dunne R.I.P.
John Franklin R.I.P.
Eilish Carrigy R.I.P.
Maura Collins R.I.P.
Angela Golding R.I.P.
Bridget Nolan R.I. P.
Mary Fahy nee Wade R.I.P.
Michael McDonagh R.I.P.
Vincent Finn R.I.P.
Mary Coen R.I.P.
Mattie Power R.I.P.
Margaret Cooke R.I.P.
Martin Nally R.I.P.
Margaret Kennedy R.I.P.
Christina Mitchell R.I.P.
Michael Derrane R.I.P.
Padraig Flaherty R.I.P.
Gerry Conneely R.I.P.
McNelis referred to item (f) in Correspondence and requested that Q4/2021 be considered
at the meeting due to an impending closing date. Mayor Cubbard agreed and read the motion to
Council for consideration.
Councillors discussed the motion.
4
Question 4/2021
Given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
Will Galway City Council be making a submission to the Commission on the Defence Forces, the
body established to undertake a sweeping review of the country's armed services? Focusing on
number of areas including workforce, equipment, capabilities and structures, it is expected to be
the greatest reform of the Defence Forces in several decades.
Suggestions for submission
1. A naval reserve (at the very least) and a permanent naval service unit for Galway.
2. Establish a medical unit for the barracks in Galway to assist with health care etc. ( currently only
one in cork)
3 Establish Galway with a permanent air corps unit for the west (currently Cork, Athlone and
Dublin).
During crises we have been able as a City to call on defence forces assistance; flooding, gorse fires,
search and recovers. Galway has a strong tradition with the Defence forces.
The closing date is March 5th.
The Motion was approved by Council.
Mr. McGrath invited Councillors to make submissions before the end of February to ensure
submission by the deadline.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 - Proposed Variation No. 7
(i) Amend Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map to extend the existing Specific Objective
— Bus Route (GTS) to provide for a link through RA zoned lands from College Road to Lough Atalia
Road.
(ii) Amend Section 3.10 Specific Objectives to provide additional text that further supports the
Galway Transport Strategy projects including Public Transport measures, the City Centre
Access Network, the Cross City Link, and the Cycle Network.
Ms. C. Phelan gave a presentation to Council on the elements of the proposed variation no. 7. She
advised that the variation relates to the Galway Transport Strategy Bus Route objective, the route
of which is mapped on the City Development Plan Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map.
In her presentation she displayed extracts from the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023
Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map showing the modification to the Bus Route (GTS)
which constitutes the Proposed Variation highlighted in Yellow. She confirmed that this relates to
the Galway Transport Strategy Bus Route objective, the route of which is mapped on the City
Development Plan Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map.
Ms. Phelan displayed an aerial and street view of the proposed variation and outlined the
proposed additions to Chapter 3, Section 3.10 specific objectives with the additional text
highlighted in red relating to Traffic and Road Network; Public Transport and Cycling. Ms. Phelan
outlined to Councillors the reason for the variation including map objective and text changes to
written statement. A flow chart overview of the proposed variation process was displayed to
5
Councillors. Ms. Phelan outlined the public consultation period which was from Thursday 26th
November 2020 to Tuesday 5th January 2021 with the receipt of seven submissions. Ms. Phelan
confirmed that all submissions are available on the City Council website to view.
Ms. Phelan gave a summary of the submissions received and the Chief Executive's opinion and
response to same and recommendations. Ms. Phelan gave the Chief Executive's conclusion and
recommendation to make a variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 without
modification.
Councillors discussed the proposed variation and matters raised included support for safer travel;
cycling infrastructure and staff required to deliver same; query regarding the number of changes
to come before Council and how much recreation & amenity lands will be taken and planning and
loss of recreation & amenity lands at Shantalla Neighbourhood Park.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Note to accept changes as set out — per Report issued Wednesday 3rd February
Cllr. O. Hanley proposed an addition as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Note to accept changes as set out — per Report issued Wednesday 3rd February and to approve
with specific reference to regard 'to proper planning and sustainable development of community'
as recommended by the NWRA.
This was agreed.
The meeting concluded at 5 p.m.
6
DRAFT Minutes of the February Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 22nd February, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Absent:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, D. Lyons
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: P. Keane & N. Larkin
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr. C.
Mr. G.
Ms. A.
Ms. G.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the adjournment meeting and proposed continuing with agenda
item 2(a) to be followed by the consideration of a NOM 03/2021 submitted by Cllr. F. Fahy and
then continue with item 2(b) and 2(c). This was agreed,
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 - Proposed Variation No. 7
(i) Amend Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map to extend the existing Specific Objective
— Bus Route (GTS) to provide for a link through RA zoned lands from College Road to Lough Atalia
Road.
(ii) Amend Section 3.10 Specific Objectives to provide additional text that further supports the
Galway Transport Strategy projects including Public Transport measures, the City Centre Access
Network, the Cross City Link, and the Cycle Network.
Cllr. D. Lyons raised concerns regarding the additional text proposed for Chapter 3 Section 3.10
'supports any additional land requirements where deemed necessary through design along the
associated route and associated traffic management
and infrastructural changes has priority over other objectives including land use zoning
objectives along identified routes.'
7
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Rohan, Administrative Officer
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllr C. Connolly also had concerns and called for a roll call vote on the proposed variation.
Councillor T. O'Flaherty expressed support for a roll call vote.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator confirmed that a roll call vote is taken in line with
Standing Orders at virtual meetings.
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner outlined the reasons for the proposed variation no. 7 and the
proposed minor realignment of the Cross City Link located between the College Road and Lough
Atalia Road to provide for a link through RA zoned passive lands, which will result in an expanded
amenity area. Ms. Phelan confirmed that the text changes highlighted in red in the presentation
are an addition to the written statement in black text which is already in the Development Plan
Document Map.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer responded to queries raised by Councillors and confirmed that the
variation is required to align specific objectives and land zoning to support projects under the
Galway Transport Strategy that are advancing to planning consent stages. Each project will need
to undergo a separate consultation and consent stage and the final decision will not rest with the
executive but with Councillors if under a part 8 or An Bord Pleanåla if under a Part 10.
The Chief Executive confirmed that this is a positive variation to enhance the transportation
network, public transport and cycling infrastructure. He confirmed that the variation is to
implement traffic management and infrastructural changes to facilitate the provision of the 'Cross
City Link' as proposed as part of the Galway Transport Strategy (GTS).
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that the variation be approved and this was seconded by Cllr. C.
Higgins. Cllr. D. McDonnell had agreed the inclusion of additional text from Cllr. O. Hanley to the
motion. As Cllr. C. Higgins was absent Cllr. M.J. Crowe seconded the proposal in her absence.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Note to accept changes as set out — per Report issued Wednesday 3rd February
Councillors discussed the proposed variation and matters raised included the need for the
variation, if extra R&A lands will be required, if this variation applied to all zonings, consultation
with residents of Loyola Park and reference to Shantalla and the status of Seamus Quirke and
Newcastle Road.
Ms. C. Phelan, Mr. U. Finn and the Chief Executive responded to queries raised.
Cllr. M. O'Connor proposed that the motion be taken under two separate votes part 2(a)(i) and
part 2(a)(ii).
8
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O'Connor Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That agenda item 2(a) Variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 —
Proposed Variation No. 7 be considered by two separate votes
2(a)(i) Amend Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map to extend the existing Specific
Objective — Bus Route (GTS) to provide for a link through RA zoned lands from College Road to
Lough Atalia Road
2a(ii) Amend Section 3.10 Specific Objectives to provide additional text that further supports the
Galway Transport Strategy projects including Public Transport measures, the City Centre Access
Network, the Cross City Link, and the Cycle Network and to add the inclusion of a specific reference
to "proper planning and sustainable development of the area" in line of the recommendations by
the NWRA.
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, , Cllr. D. Lyons,
Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. E. Hoare,
Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. N. McNelis
In Favour: 8 Against: 7 Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Mr. G. McMahon Meeting Administrator sought clarification on the addition of text by Cllr. O.
Hanley. Cllr. D. McDonnell confirmed that the additional text related to 2(a)(ii) and there was a
discussion on the manner on which the vote is taken.
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on the proposed variation no. 7 on the agenda
as 2(a)(i):
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
2(a) Variations to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 - Proposed Variation No. 7
(i) Amend Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map to extend the existing Specific Objective
— Bus Route (GTS) to provide for a link through RA zoned lands from College Road to Lough Atalia
Road.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
Variation no. 7 part 2(a)(i) was approved.
9
The Chief Executive requested a five minute adjournment to consider implications, if any, of taking
two separate votes on variation no. 7. Cllr. T. O'Flaherty proposed the break at 4.08 p.m. and this
was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy and agreed.
The meeting resumed at 4.15 p.m. and the Chief Executive advised that item 2(a)(i) and 2(a)(ii) are
not mutually exclusive and are inextricably linked. However, a democratic decision has been made
to consider the elements of the variation individually.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed 2(a)(ii), this was seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to commence taking of a Roll Calt Vote on the proposal.
It was noted that Cllr. O. Hanley had requested to add the inclusion of a specific reference to
"proper planning and sustainable development of the area" in line of the recommendations by the
NWRA.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe advised that he did not second the additional text of Cllr. O. Hanley to the proposal
as the wording is believed to be superfluous per opinion on page 12 of the Chief Executive's
Report.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed 2(a)(ii) with the additional text of Cllr. O. Hanley. Cllr. D. McDonnell then
seconded this proposal.
Mr. G. McMahon Meeting Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on the proposed
variation no. 7 on the agenda as 2(a)(ii) with the addition of Cllr. O. Hanley/ s text:
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
2(a) Variations to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 - Proposed Variation No. 7
(ii) Amend Section 3.10 Specific Objectives to provide additional text that further supports the
Galway Transport Strategy projects including Public Transport measures, the City Centre Access
Network, the Cross City Link, and the Cycle Network and to add the inclusion of a specific reference
to "proper planning and sustainable development of the area" in line of the recommendations by
the NWRA.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis
& Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 16
Variation no. 7 part 2(a)(ii) was approved.
10
Mayor Cubbard referred to NOM 3/20201 submitted by Cllr. F. Fahy to be considered by Council
under Standing Order no. 34 as a motion for purpose of dealing with urgent business.
Councillors discussed the motion and individual matters raised included that the Government is
currently implementing recommendation no. 36.
Cllr. J. Connolly requested that recommendation no. 10 also be included in the motion 'the
Committee recommends the employment of specialist child court liaison officers to provide
procedural information and support to children and families during the course of family law
proceedings'.
Cllr. F. Fahy agreed to add the addition of recommendation no. 10 to the wording of the original
motion.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to read the motion:
NOM 3/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 27th January 2021
Supported by: Cllrs. C. Connolly, M. Cubbard, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty.
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government Departments of Health, Justice and Equality
and of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth to recognise that Parental alienation is
a situation when a child's resistance or hostility towards one parent is not justified and is the result
of psychological manipulation by the other parent and to implement recommendation no. 10 and
36 of the Report of the Reform of the Family Law System October 2019 now being reviewed by
the Family Justice Oversight Group.
The Motion was agreed and passed.
2(b) Consideration of the Statutory Local Government Audit Report 2019
2(c)(i) Report to Council on Local Government Auditors Report for 2019
The Chief Executive referred Councillors to the Local Government Audit Report 2019 and item 2c(i)
the Audit Committee Report to Council on the report. He advised that these reports were linked
and suggested they be considered together. This was agreed. He added that it was a very positive
report.
Councillors discussed the Audit Report 2019 and matters raised individually included the number
of repayment of special contributions to planning applicants and the value of same, registration
of assets and any conflict arising from 20% of assets registered to third parties, debtors, rates,
housing rents, query regarding reference to COVID, query whether money spent on land for
affordable housing is recoupable, procurement and areas outstanding including legal services,
timeframe for transfer of assets to Irish Water, compliments to the executive regarding the
consideration of use for the Old Waterworks building as a potential water sports facility,
11
governance, staffing, Ethics register, Leisureland, shared services and the service level agreement
between Galway City and Galway County Councils.
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed to accept the findings of the audit and the audit committee. This was
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
The Chief Executive confirmed that responses to queries raised will issue in writing to Councillors.
2(c)(iii). Appointment of External Member to Audit Committee
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
2(c)(iii ) Appointment of Mr. Aidan Horan, External Member to Audit Committee
This was agreed.
2(c) Audit Committee
2(c)(ii). Audit Committee Objectives and Work Programme 2021
Not Considered
The meeting concluded at 17:01 p.m.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Review to Renew — Submission made by Galway City Council on 28th January 2021
Not Considered
(b) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Not Considered
(d) Chief Executive's Reports — Not Considered
ii.
January 2021
February 2021
(e) Quarterly Report, October to December 2020 — Not Considered
ii.
iii.
iv.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
12
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising
meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective
actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib.
NOM 8/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the hospitality
industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.'
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended medals to the
Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat Quinlan recommended 5
medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men
are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to make this a priority.'
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. ÜConnor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
NOM 22/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That an urgent safety assessment be carried out on Dominick Street and remedial works be carried
out to mitigate danger to the significantly increased number of residents, particularly families with
young children.'
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
13
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the City that
parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to encourage
people to come into the city.'
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines for
Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a local ward will
be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area committee, to enable area
committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate at which that portion is retained
shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the LPT variation rate is decided.'
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling network
across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle network
currently happening across the city'.
NOM 2/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th January 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to initiate a compulsory purchase order of the vacant site that
is the Corrib Great Southern Dublin Road in the absence of the commencement date of demolition
of the site.
Response issued 3rd February 2021
NOM 4/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. l. Byrne
Date Received: 31st January 2021
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a week in
the main city parks to ensure that they are safe and of high maintenance for the benefit of the
public and of biodiversity, and this commitment will be part of the council's contribution towards
achieving the vision of Galway as a National Park City.
NOM 5/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
In light of the findings of the recently published reports on the future development of the disused
Western Rail Corridor from Athenry to Claremorris, and the commencement of public consultation
on the development of the Athlone to Galway greenway, this Council supports the development of
both greenways, from Athlone to Galway, and Athenry to Claremorris, on the basis that their
development will drive tourism and economic growth across the West, with Galway City being the
ultimate destination for users of both greenways.
14
NOM 6/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
This Council recognises that-
For many people, particularly younger women we know that period poverty, or the inability
to afford period products that meet your needs is an issue. Using period products for longer
periods of time than is recommended or using unsuitable alternatives can lead to infections
and health issues. We recognise that this is both a health and justice issue.
Period injustice has huge knock on effects for women, girls and trans people who may feel
they have no choice but to miss out on educational activities, work or recreation due to not
having appropriate products.
This Council commends the Scottish Government in making available period products free
of charge in their schools, educational institutions, and public buildings.
This Council further supports the Period Products (Free Provision) Bill 2021 currently in the
Oireachtas.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 3/2021
Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 31st January 2021
The recent Irish Businesses Against Litter Report highlighted that over the past year littering has
grown as an issue, and Galway was no exception in that.
Significant littering and illegal dumping has taken place over the last several months, including
around Christmas week, and especially in communities in the Eastside of the city. Ballybane
continues to be highlighted within the report as an area of concern which "wasn't just subject to
casual litter but subject to dumping."
Recognising the work of staff, particular ground staff in tackling this issue to date, in 2021 Galway
City Council will have to face this issue with significant restrictions. The IBAL report suggests "with
restrictions on time and resources. Local authorities need to be more selective in their cleaning
efforts."
In 2021 what additional measures will Galway City Council put in place to address littering and
dumping within communities, particularly in the Ballybane area where waste continues to
accumulate at regular dumping spots?
Response issued 3rd February 2021
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
M es, Co fi med & Signed
Mayor of Galway
15
