Minutes of the Ordinary March Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 8th March, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillor J. Connolly
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr
. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Ms.
E. Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms.
N. Keane, Senior Staff Officer
Ms.
E. Fanning, A/Senior Engineer
Ms.
. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms
. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
. B. Gallagher, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a
moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting and suggested taking Item I(a) Confirmation of
Minutes and Items under 2. Business Prescribed by Statute on the agenda, and then, Items
4(e)(i) and 4(e)(ii) Chief Executive's Reports for February and March for consideration.
Cllr. C. Connolly advised that the March CE Report was received on Friday 5th March which she
believed was not sufficient time to consider along with all the other documentation that
Councillors receive.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that Item 4(e)(i) February Chief Executive's Report be considered and
Item 4(e)(ii) remain on the agenda. Cllr. T. O'Flaherty seconded same and the running order
was agreed.
es, Con
1
& Signa
Mayor of Galway
As it was International Women's day Cllr. M. O'Connor requested to say a few words. She
remembered all women that marched on New York City in 1908 to bring attention to working
conditions, achieving gender equality for women and girls is the greatest unfinished business
of our times. She said that 78% of those in the frontline healthcare are women we were never
more reliant or grateful for their work as we have been this year.
Cllr. O'Connor advised that with the support of Cllr. M. Hoade and Minister P. Burke and some
colleagues, her aim is to set up a caucus for women in Galway with County colleagues to look
at issues such as retention of those that have been elected and promote girls and women's
interest in putting themselves forward for election. Cllr. O'Connor referred to 'Guth' which is
the Irish word for voice and for vote and she called on all to make the changes required to hear
a diversity of voices more equitably.
Mayor Cubbard wished all a happy International Women's Day.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th February 2021 and adjournment meeting
held on 22nd February 2021
Mayor Cubbard invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
None were raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th February 2021 and
adjournment meeting held on 22nd February 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Consideration of the Statutory Local Government Audit Report 2019
& 2(b) Audit Committee (i) Report to Council on Local Government Auditors Report for 2019
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to the written response regarding queries on the Audit
Report 2019 that issued to Councillors in advance of the meeting. He queried if there were any
further contributions or queries that any Councillor wished to make.
Additional queries included: what was the biggest risk for Galway City Council going forward
post COVID; what value of levies were outstanding with regards to the Corrib Great Southern
site and what the City Council have done to retrieve same; if any indication of a further rates
waiver from April to June; query if any issues/claims for building works delayed due to COVID;
why no note was included to explain the status of outstanding assets to be registered; request
for net capital spend and capital loans outstanding and annual interest on unsold affordable
housing.
2
The Chief Executive responded to queries raised by Councillors in detail while referring to the
document with the written responses that issued to Councillors.
The Chief Executive clarified that derelict sites or vacant site levies did not form part of the
Audit Report.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services also responded to queries raised.
2b(ii) Audit Committee Objectives and Work Programme 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Motion to Adopt:
2(a) Statutory Local Government Audit Report 2019
2(b)(i) Audit Committee Report to Council on Local Government Auditors Report for 2019
2(b)(ii) Audit Committee Objectives and Work Programme 2021
This was agreed and the Reports were adopted.
2(c) Approval to Raise a Loan under the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme
Councillors discussed the proposal and the loan scheme. Matters raised included the small
number of applications drawn down; the drawdown period, median amount of loans approved
in 2020, refusal of loans by banks allegedly due to clawback criteria in affordable scheme and
whether the new scheme will include same, advertisement of the scheme and other criteria.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
2(c) Approval to Raise a Loan under the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan
Approval to Raise a Loan of €3,510,000 under the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme from
the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, through the Housing Finance
Agency, for the purpose of granting house purchase and improvement loans in Galway City —
per Report circulated Wednesday 3rd March
This was agreed and approved.
2(d) Section 48 Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020 — 2026
Ms. R. McNally introduced the background to the draft Development Contribution Scheme. She
referred to workshops completed with Councillors in October 2020 and consideration of the
draft Scheme by the Planning Strategic Policy Committee.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
2(d) To adopt the Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020
circulated
- 2026 -
per document
3
Ms. E. Silke gave a presentation to Council outlining what is a Development Contribution
Scheme; why the current Scheme is being reviewed now; steps taken to date; considerations
when preparing a Draft Scheme; summary of existing charges v proposed new charges and the
rationale for changes to charges. Ms. Silke outlined the one submission and one observation
received and the Chief Executive's responses. Ms. Silke advised the Chief Executive's
recommendation that the Draft Scheme is adopted without any amendment and commenced
on May 2021.
Councillors discussed the draft Scheme and raised a number of queries including the
application of the draft scheme and exemptions proposed; whether contribution fees were
paid in lieu of parking and if these fees could be ring-fenced for public transport initiatives; if
any potential conflicts with the City Development Plan and reference to the lack of public
participation.
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner responded to queries raised.
As the time was nearing 5pm, Mayor Cubbard proposed that contributions be received at the
next adjournment meeting from outstanding Councillors that wished to speak; namely; Cllrs. E.
Hoare, N. Murphy, T. O'Flaherty, C. Connolly and D. McDonnell. This was seconded by Cllr. D.
Lyons and agreed.
2(e) Replacement of an SPC Member - Vacancy following resignation of Cllr. F. Fahy from
Housing SPC - By Resolution
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
2(e) Replacement of an SPC Member - Proposal that Cllr. E Hoare fill the vacancy following
resignation of Cllr. F. Fahy from Housing SPC
This proposal was agreed unanimously.
Mayor Cubbard referred Councillors to Agenda Items 7, 9 and 10 for consideration.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Agenda Item 7. Correspondence be noted.
Agenda Item 9. Conferences be approved
Agenda Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations be approved.
This was agreed.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence were noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 2nd February 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 2nd February 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 9th February 2021 received from Clare County Council
4
(d) Correspondence dated 9th February 2021 received from Clare County Council
(e) Correspondence dated 12th February 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(f) Correspondence dated 16th February 2021 received from South Dublin County Council
(g) Correspondence dated 16th February 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(h) Correspondence dated 16th February 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(i) Correspondence dated 17th February 2021 received from Office of the Minister of State,
Hildegarde Naughton
(j) National Water Resources Plan (NWRP) Draft Framework Plan —Consultation 2
(k) Copy of thank you card received from the family of John Franklin, R.I.P.
9. CONFERENCES
Conferences were approved.
1. Title: Policy Forum for Northern Ireland — Key priorities for housing policy in Northern Ireland
Date: 20th April 2021
Venue: Online
Cllr. Martina O'Connor was approved to attend.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy/congratulations were approved
Votes of Sympathy:
Tom Jackson R.I.P.
• Ryan Daly R.I.P.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that a Special Meeting be held to deal with Motions outstanding on
the Agenda. Mayor Cubbard advised that a potential date will be considered.
Councillor N. McNelis requested that item 3(a) and 3(b) be considered. Cllr. M.J. Crowe
requested that item 3(a) be considered at the adjournment meeting. It was agreed to consider
item 3(b) only.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(b) Ratification of SPC recommendation for Museum Accreditation
Cllr. N. McNelis requested that the Council ratify the SPC recommendation for Museum
Accreditation.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
3(b) To Ratify SPC recommendation for Museum Accreditation
This was agreed and approved.
The Chief Executive informed Councillors of a forecast of tidal surges but advised that there
was no immediate concern.
The meeting concluded at 16:55 p.m.
5
DRAFT Minutes of the March Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 22nd March, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Deputy Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Mayor M. Cubbard
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
. E. Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms
. E. Fanning, A/Senior Engineer
Ms
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms.
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
B. Gallagher, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
F. Kearney, Administrative Officer
Ms.
. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllr. C. Connolly, Deputy Chair welcomed all to the meeting as gaeilge and explained that Mayor
Cubbard was stepping back from his role for a short period following a series of violent threats
which have been made against him. She offered her full support to the Mayor and his family
and expressed her utter condemnation of the threats Mayor Cubbard is being subjected to and
said that no public representative should have to suffer threats.
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly proposed that the Executive offer support to the Mayor and his
family and sought agreement that the executive write to Mayor Cubbard and his family to offer
supports and condemn these actions. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
The sentiment was echoed by numerous Councillors.
Cllr. N. Larkin proposed that Mayor Cubbard and his family be offered alternative
accommodation, if desired in the short term to a safe location while the matter is being
resolved adding that no one should have to live under those conditions. This was seconded by
Cllr. D. McDonnell.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath advised that he wished to join in the collective condemnation
of the behaviour of a minority. He confirmed that he has been in regular contact with the Mayor
offering support and will be happy to speak to the Mayor again after the meeting. He advised
that he will work with the Gardai on the matter.
6
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly requested a five minute break at 4 p.m. and proposed the following
running order of the agenda: item 2(d) Draft Development Contribution Scheme followed by
4(f) Draft Control of Horses Bye Laws; 3(a) Minutes of CPG meeting of 15th February and 4(e)
Chief Executive's Reports for February and March 2021. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
and agreed.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(d) Section 48 Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020 — 2026
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly invited Councillors who had indicated their expression to speak at
the end of the March Ordinary meeting on Monday 8th March to contribute if they wished.
Individual Councillors discussed the draft Development Contribution Scheme and matters
raised included fees applied to classes of development; definition of third level development
and non-academic and discussion regarding any potential exemptions to same; a number of
development scenarios regarding the application of the scheme; application of schemes in
other Local Authorities; element of contributions applied to transport and if any exemptions to
application of the scheme for Council or Approved Housing Body developments.
The Chief Executive reminded Councillors of their obligation to declare any potential conflict of
interest they may have regarding individual institutions should a specific motion be raised
regarding same.
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner and Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services responded to
Councillors queries in detail.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed the adoption of the Development Contribution Scheme. This was
seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
At 4 p.m., an adjournment of 5 minutes was taken. The meeting resumed at 4.05 p.m.
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly indicated that a Roll Call Vote will be taken. Mr. G. McMahon,
Meetings Administrator proceeded to take same as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To adopt the Development Contribution Scheme 2020 — 2026 — per Report circulated'.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons,
Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. O. Hanley
In Favour: 15 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Development Contribution Scheme was adopted.
7
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Minutes from Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Monday 15th February 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3(a) To note minutes from Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Monday 15th February
2021
This was agreed and noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(f) Draft Control of Horses Bye Laws
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services referred Councillors to the Draft Control of Horses Byelaws
for their information and noting. He advised that a notice will be published outlining that the
draft bye laws will be available for inspection and inviting submission from the public during the
public consultation period of four weeks until April 22nd and that the final date for submissions
will be on 29th April. He added that an online submission facility will also be available.
Mr. Mahon advised that a report on the submissions received will be prepared for initial
consideration by the Housing and Social Inclusion SPC at their meeting on May 28th, 2021 and
that it is intended that the final document and summary of submissions will come before full
Council for consideration in Q3 2021.
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly proposed that the full Council have the opportunity to amend the
draft byelaws, if desired, and requested clarity on why Councillors cannot amend the draft which
was only approved by the Strategic Policy Committee, adding that Councillors had no chance to
comment on same. This was seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe.
Councillors discussed the proposed draft Control of Horses Bye Laws and individual matters
raised included the complex language used in the draft byelaws, recent court judicial review and
in what circumstances would disposal of a horse be considered.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries raised and advised that the language used in the draft
Byelaws included legal and appropriate terminology. He referred to the proposed licensing
system and confirmed that all efforts will be exhausted to reunite an animal with its owner
before disposal is considered. He advised that a separate user-friendly document could be
produced when the Report is referred back to full Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. N. Murphy
4(f) To note the Draft Control of Horses Bye Laws
This was agreed and noted.
8
4(e) Chief Executive's Report:
i. February 2021
ii. March 2021
Cllr. M. O'Connor requested that her Notice of Motion 21/2020 be considered
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Mr. B. McG rath, Chief Executive requested that Councillors consider giving this important matter
appropriate consideration in its own right at a separate meeting.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that the Chief Executive's Report be considered as the first item at
the next Council meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin.
Cllr. N. Larkin proposed a Special meeting.
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly agreed that in discussion with Mayor Cubbard a date for a Special
meeting in April will be proposed.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed a Special meeting on Monday 19th April. This was seconded by Cllr. M.
O'Connor.
Deputy Mayor, C. Connolly advised that this proposed meeting date can be considered at the
next Ordinary April Council meeting scheduled for Monday 12th April.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that a Procedure's Meeting is scheduled for Wednesday
31st March and that suggestions to deal with Notices of Motions be considered at this meeting.
It was agreed that the matter be considered at the Procedures Meeting and a proposed date for
a Special meeting be brought back to the full Council at the April Ordinary Meeting scheduled
for Monday 12th April 2021 for consideration.
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Keane that a Report be prepared for consideration by full Council on
the merits or otherwise of declaring a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency and including what
practical consequences this would have for Galway city and that this Report be received two
weeks in advance of the proposed Special meeting for discussion at this meeting. This was
seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly and agreed.
Councillors discussed the Chief Executive's Reports and individual matters raised included:
Reference to the lack of Gaeilge used in COVID-19 signage and if a response issued to An
Coimisinéir Teanga on the matter; Affordable Housing Bill and reserved function and query if
elected members will be on the Steering Committee, clarification on the provision of lighting on
the interior of the Westside running track; reference to Quarry House Lands at Merlin and
request for due diligence at this geological site and query if lands adjoining the site zoned 'R'
required consideration of a change in zoning; queries on dates for public consultation on the
BusConnects Dublin Road project; request for a five year plan for maintenance of roads in older
areas of the city like Bohermore; Claddagh; Mervue and Shantalla; query if housing policy is for
9
mixed development of affordable and social housing and if any discussion with the Department
regarding the 'clawback clause'; query if any further proposals for Barna woods; update on anti-
slip surface and a slow zone for Gleann na Coille; query regarding Rushen Woods walking route
and any proposed extension at the shoreside and pavement on Lough Rusheen; reference to
bathing waters and request for a response to queries submitted by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty; request
that bad condition of footpaths in Mervue be examined; request for cycle networks progress
with updated timelines and that short; medium and long term actions be put into place to aid in
the prevention of the tragic loss of life at our river steps.
It was agreed that responses to queries raised will issue to Councillors in writing.
4(c) Galway City Council Community Department:
4(c)(ii) Galway City LCDC Annual Report 2020
Cllr. O. Hanley commended the work of Ms. C. Morgan and the team and proposed the noting
of the Galway City LCDC Annual Report 2020.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
4(c)(ii) To note the Galway City LCDC Annual Report 2020
This was agreed and noted.
4(a) Government policy paper in relation to Irish Water
Not Considered.
4(b) Update re COVID 19 "The Path Ahead" - Covid 19 Resilience and Recovery
Not Considered.
4(c) Galway City Council Community Department:
i. Galway City COVID-19 Community Response Forum
iii. NESC Review of Community Call
Not Considered.
4(d) National Development Plan, Review to Renew — Submission made by Galway City
Council on 28th January 2021 — circulated February 2021
Not Considered.
4(g) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Not Considered.
4(h) Update regarding proposed Regional Aquatic Centre at Cappagh Park
Not Considered.
10
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
Not Considered.
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended
medals to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat
Quinlan recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have
yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to
make this a priority.'
Not Considered.
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
Not Considered.
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
Not Considered.
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the
City that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday
to encourage people to come into the city.'
Not Considered.
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines
for Galway City Council. Under these uidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a
11
local ward will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area
committee, to enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate
at which that portion is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the
LPT variation rate is decided.'
Not Considered.
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling
network across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle
network currently happening across the city'.
Not Considered.
NOM 4/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. l. Byrne
Date Received: 31st January 2021 — Amended 18th February 2021
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a
week in the main city parks to ensure that they are safe and of high maintenance for the
benefit of the public and of biodiversity.
Not Considered.
NOM 5/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
In light of the findings of the recently published reports on the future development of the
disused Western Rail Corridor from Athenry to Claremorris, and the commencement of
public consultation on the development of the Athlone to Galway greenway, this Council
supports the development of both greenways, from Athlone to Galway, and Athenry to
Claremorris, on the basis that their development will drive tourism and economic growth
across the West, with Galway City being the ultimate destination for users of both
greenways.
Not Considered.
NOM 6/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
This Council recognises that-
For many people, particularly younger women we know that period poverty, or the
inability to afford period products that meet your needs is an issue. Using period
products for longer periods of time than is recommended or using unsuitable
alternatives can lead to infections and health issues. We recognise that this is both
a health and justice issue.
Period injustice has huge knock on effects for women, girls and trans people who
may feel they have no choice but to miss out on educational activities, work or
recreation due to not having appropriate products.
This Council commends the Scottish Government in making available period
products free of charge in their schools, educational institutions, and public
buildings.
12
• This Council further supports the Period Products (Free Provision) Bill 2021 currently
in the Oireachtas.
Not Considered.
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered.
NOM 8/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 25th February 2021
That Galway City Council recognises that Section 183 of the Local Government Act, is one
of the most important reserved functions delegated to elected members.
- That this Council opposes the provisions in the Land Development Agency 2021 Bill (to
be enacted) which overrides the decision making of elected members regarding the
transfer or sale of public land. That this Bill would further undermine local democracy and
the work of our Council Executive in the proper planning of our county/city and our local
communities.
- That this Council will continue to actively engage with the Dept. of Housing to utilise and
implement housing models that will provide social and affordable housing for the people
of Galway and retain the ability to plan for the associated infrastructure of such
developments.
- That this Council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government
demanding an immediate halt to the progression of the Land Development Agency Bill
2021, that the Minister engage in consultation with Local Authorities and that the Council
invites the Minister to meet with Councillors to discuss this further.
Not Considered.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should
be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered.
13
NOM 10/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make a formal submission to the Minister for Housing,
Local Government & Heritage outlining our complete opposition to the proposed provisions
of the Land Development Agency Bill 2021.
The proposed removal of the Section 183 reserved function of Elected Members in relation
to the disposal of local authority held land to the LDA as provided for in Part 7 Section 56
of the bill is unacceptable and an affront to Local Democracy. As advocates for the
empowerment of local government, we can never support or accept any diminution in the
reserved functions and powers of Elected Members.
I also have concerns regarding the potential long-term implications for local authorities in
delivering social and affordable housing on local authority held land due to the extensive
remit of the LDA. I believe that this is a major battle in our ongoing fight to preserve the
local democratic function in the face of ever-increasing centralism.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services Union)
asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures during the
pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to discuss what
direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not Considered.
NOM 12/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council would review the current policy of not affixing the appropriate
penalty to the vehicle of a motorist in breach of parking regulations at the time of the
offence.
Not Considered.
14
6. QUESTIONS
Question 05/2021
Question by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 25th February 2021
To ask the Council for a progress update on the objective in the current City Development
Plan to consider the development of a swimming pool in RA lands at Doughiska North.
Reply issued with Agenda 3M March 2021
Question 6/2021
Question by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: March 2021
Can Galway City Council issue a report to Council regarding the illegal take over of the road
in Claddagh at the junction of Lower Fairhill Road and Munster Ave.
Not Considered.
Question 7/2021
Question by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt March 2021
What can Galway City Council do to assist with anti-social behaviour on laneways in
Knocknacarra. This has been raised with Gardai but council is responsible for lighting,
maintenance.
Residents want laneways closed which will lead to permeability affected. The decision
taken at White Oaks and St. John the Apostle school during last development plan has led
to large increases of anti-social behaviour. The laneway was never surfaced properly,
lighting is very poor and upkeep of area poor.
Similar to past requests what is update on laneway at Manor Court and Cimin M6r. This
continues to be used daily by pedestrians and cyclists and no proper surface in place.
Not Considered.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 16:54 p.m.
15
