Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
A Io ies:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 8th April 2019,
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N.
Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty, and J. Walsh.
Connell, A/ Chief Executive
Mr. T.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
. B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Mr
. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr
L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Mr.
. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Ms
Ms. Michelle Beirne, Executive Planner
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. E. Silke, A/ Administrative Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
N/A
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.02pm, with a minute of silence and reflection. This was in
sympathy with Cllr Michael 'Stroke' Fahy, who recently passed away; the victims of the New Zealand
shootings in Christchurch; and the families of the teenagers of Cookstown in Northern Ireland, following
the tragic loss of life in March 2019.
Mr Gary McMahon, Meetings Administrator, declared the meeting open with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders.
The Mayor expressed the apologies of the Chief Executive, Mr. B. McGrath for his absence, and proposed
to end the meeting at 6.00pm. The Mayor proposed a Special Meeting of Galway City Council on Tuesday
16th of April 2019, starting at 10.00am. The Mayor advised that he had requested the Chair of the Planning
SPC, Cllr. O. Crowe, to defer the Planning SPC to facilitate the Special Meeting.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed a start time of 9.00am. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
11
Page
The Mayor proposed a start time of 9.30am. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. The Mayor proposed
to finish the Special Meeting at 6pm, allowing for a break for lunch. A vote was taken.
Proposed by: Mayor McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
To hold a Special Meeting of Galway City Council on Tuesday 16th April 2019, from 9.30am to 6.00pm,
with a break for lunch.
In favour: 8 Against: 1
The proposal was agreed.
Abstain: O
Present: 9
Cllr D. McDonnell proposed to take Item 1 (Minutes) first, then proceed to Item 4 (h) on the public realm.
The Mayor proposed to take item 1 (Minutes), then to note a number of items, before receiving the report
on 4 (h) on the Public Realm Strategy.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
To note Items 1 (a) and (b): Confirmation of Minutes:
a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, on the 11th March 2019.
b) Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council, on the 25th March 2019.
Items 1 (a) and 1 (b) were noted.
The Mayor proposed to note Maters Arising and Correspondence. Cllr. C. Connolly requested that it be
noted that Members could send questions to the Executive re same. The Mayor agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To note and adopt:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2. Business Prescribed by Statute:
a) To Consider the issuing of Polling Cards for Local Government Electors in accordance with Article 55
of the Local Election Regulation 1995 and the Local Elections Order 2019.
In favour: 9
Abstain: O
Against: O
Present: 9
Items 2 (a) was noted and adopted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To note and adopt:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2. Business Prescribed by Statute:
b) Galway City LCDC Annual Report 2018, as per Section 128B of the Local Government Act 2001.
Abstain: O
In favour: 9 Against: O
Items 2 (b) was noted and adopted.
Present: 9
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To note and adopt:
21
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2. Business Prescribed by Statute:
c) Galway City Joint Policing Committee Annual Report 2018, as per Section 36 (5) of the Garda Siochåna
Act 2005
In favour: 9 Against: O
Abstain: O
Present: 9
Items 2 c was noted and adopted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To note and adopt:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2. Business Prescribed by Statute:
f) Section 183 - Lease of Carrowbrowne Composting Facility.
In favour: 9 Against: O
Abstain: O
Present: 9
Items 2 (f) was noted and adopted.
Cllr. P. Flannery queried progress and locations for provision of hurling walls, under item 2 (h) Annual
Financial Statement, 2018. Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries and advised 2 (h) relates to 2018 only,
but that one hurling wall would progress in each ward, with Cappagh to be considered for the West
ward.
Item 2 (h) — Annual Financial Statement, 2018
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approval of Annual Financial Statements (Unaudited) for year ended 31st December 2018
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approval of Transfers To/From Reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the Accounts.
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approval of Over/Under Expenditure by Division as detailed in Note 16 of the Accounts.
Item 2 (h) was approved by Members.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonell
To note Item 7 — Correspondence, and Item 8 — Items for Councillors Information.
Item 7 — Correspondence, and Item 8 — Items for Councillors Information — were noted.
Item 9 — Conferences
1) Title: Nuclear Free Local Authorities — All Ireland Forum Spring Energy & Nuclear Policy Seminar
Date: 22nd March 2019
Venue: Kilkenny City Town Hall (The Tholsel), High Street, Kilkenny.
(RETROSPECTIVE)
31 Page
1)
Approved Training:
Title: AILG Module 2
(RETROSPECTIVE)
Date & Venue: 21st March 2019, Park Hotel, Dungarvan, Co. Waterford (Southern Region)
Date & Venue: 23rd March 2019, Arklow Bay Hotel, Co. Wicklow (Eastern & Midlands Region)
Date & Venue: 28th March 2019, Radisson Hotel, Rosses Point, Sligo (Border & Western Region)
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Declan McDonnell,
Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. John Walsh & Cllr. Padraig Conneely
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
To note Item 9 — Conferences and Training.
Item 9 — Conferences and Training — was noted.
Item 3 — Reports of Committee Meetings
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To note Item 3 (a) - Minutes from the Meeting of the Procedures Committee, of 18th February 2019.
Item 3 (a) was noted.
Following noting of items as above, the Mayor proposed the running order of the meeting.
The Mayor proposed to take item 2 (d) at this meeting. The Mayor proposed to defer items 2 (e) and 2
(g). The Mayor proposed to take Items 3 (b), 4 (e) and 3 (c) together, in relation to the Marketing Fund.
The Mayor proposed to then take Items 4 (a) and 4 (l) (i) together.
The Mayor proposed to defer items 4 (b), 4 (c), 4 (d), 4 (f), 4 (g), 4 (i), 4 (j), 4 (k) (i), 4 (k) (ii), and 4 (l) (ii)
(iii) (iv) (v) (vi).
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
To proceed with the running order as proposed by the Mayor.
The running order was agreed.
Item 4 (h) Update on Galway City Centre Public Realm Strategy
The Mayor invited Ms. R. McNally to report on the background of the Galway City Centre Public Realm
Strategy. The strategy is being delivered through a team of consultants, overseen by a cross-
departmental steering group in Galway City Council. Work is ongoing, and to date includes public
consultations workshops and a walking audit. Ms. L. Dodds, Allies and Morrison Urban Practitioners and
Mr. D. Foley, Dermot Foley Landscape Architects, gave a presentation on their key findings and progress
to date.
At 3.23pm, the Mayor left the meeting and Deputy Mayor, Cllr. D. Lyons, took the Chair. At 3.25pm the
Mayor returned to the Chair.
41
Page
The Mayor thanked Ms. L Dodds and Mr. D. Foley for their presentation and invited comments from
Members.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Connectivity; inclusion of people with disabilities; surface finishes; taxi ranks; greenspaces; waterways;
canals; upper floors of buildings; rain-proofing; phasing of traffic lights; on-street parking; bollards on
paths; tree policy; street furniture; harbour development and ownership; timeframe for implementation;
buskers and performance areas; Small Crane covered area; use of native species and pollinators; micro
hydra/ photo voltaic energy sources; relationship of strategy to other plans/ policies; bins; Claddagh
basin; funding for the strategy and its status in legislative terms viz a viz the City Development Plan;
Browne Roundabout; public engagement; microspaces; trees in Eyre Square; loading bays and
restrictions on deliveries; space for arts; retail strategy.
Ms. R. McNally responded comprehensively to Members queries and confirmed the preparation of the
Public Realm Strategy is an objective of the Development Plan and its preparation is not a reserved
function. The purpose of the strategy is to give guidance on the management and use of the public
domain to achieve a common standard and design across the city through the design manuals that will
accompany the strategy. There is no specific funding source for the Strategy, but its objectives will be
implemented through a variety of schemes and projects being carried out both by the City Council and
private sector in key regeneration sites throughout the city. All relevant works will need to be cognisant
of the strategy and its design manuals.
Mr. J. Fannon, Allies and Morrison Urban Practitioners, further responded to specific Members' queries,
confirming that the Strategy is a vision of what is possible in the city.
Ms. C. Phelan highlighted the fact that without a public realm strategy, the approach in the city is very ad
hoc and such a strategy is a good reference source for guidance and ensuring a consistent approach to
the use of space. Ms. C. Phelan also advised that the final strategy will be presented to Members when
completed later this year.
5 | Page
Item 2 (d) Consideration of Notice under Section 179 of the Planning and Development
Act 2000, as amended and Part VIII, Article 81 of the Planning and Development
Regulations 2001, as amended — Extension to Mount St. Joseph's Cemetery, Rahoon.
Ms. D. Ryan, Punch Consulting Engineers, presented on the proposed extension to Mount St Joseph's
Cemetery, Rahoon. The proposed extension will provide 641 new grave plots, 45 urn/half grave plots and
a memorial garden which will include an area for installing the ashes of the deceased whom have been
cremated.
Mr. L. Blake reported on the Planners Report for the proposed extension. An application was made
pursuant to the requirements of Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, as
amended. Notice was given that Galway City Council proposes to undertake an extension to the existing
Cemetery at Mount St. Joseph's Cemetery, Rahoon, at the north eastern area of the site. One
submission was received in response to the application, as advertised. Drainage run off will be managed
through work with Punch Consulting Engineers. A number of conditions have been put in place for the
proposed extension, with the recommendation to proceed. Subject to approval the development will be
advanced as a high priority; tender documents will be prepared with a view to appointing a main
contractor to commence works before the end of Q4 2019 and completion by Q3 2020.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Capacity in Bohermore; parking; accessibility; number of spaces; waste disposal; management of pests
during building works; lawn cemetery and use of kerbs/ borders; water run-off/ safety relating to the
stream adjacent to the site; future graveyard locations; memorial garden concept; provision of a
crematorium.
Mr. C. Kilcoyne responded comprehensively to Members' queries and advised that each grave would
have a surround at ground level, to facilitate maintenance and mowing. Graves would also have space
for flowers and gravestones. Mr. T. Connell advised Members that other graveyard sites are actively
being pursued, with attaining suitable sites an issue for both the City and the County alike. Three
potential sites are presently being pursued. Detailed assessments will be conducted, in order to acquire
by assent. If required, the CPO process will be pursued if this is not successful. Mr. D. Mahon advised
Members that the Chief Executive's Report notes that a progress report will be brought before the
Council at the June 2019 meeting of the City Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. P. Keane
Item 2 (d) Consideration of Notice under Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as
amended and Part VIII, Article 81 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, as amended —
Extension to Mount St. Joseph's Cemetery, Rahoon.
In favour— 17 Against - O Abstain —O
Present — 17
Item 2 (d) was approved.
61 Page
Item 3 (b) Minutes of the Corporate Policy Group Meeting, of 11th March 2019;
and (c) Report of the Corporate Policy Group Meeting, of 11th March, and Item 4
(e) Marketing Promotion Fund 2019
Mr. B. Barrett reported on the recommendations of the Corporate Policy Group regarding the Marketing
Promotion Fund 2019. A meeting of the CPG of Galway City on the 11th March 2019 considered the Draft
Marketing Fund 2019 proposals, which were now for consideration by Council.
Mr. B. Barrett advised that the budget for 2019 was €210,000. The fund was open for submissions from
24th January 2019 to 22nd February 2019. 25 submissions were received, with €475,984 being sought. All
submissions were reviewed in accordance with the Marketing Promotion Fund Guidelines. The CPG
recommended that €72,000 be transferred to the Marketing Reserve Fund, with the remaining €138,000
allocated across 20 projects, as per the report previously circulated.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Contributions to GIAF; allocations to Salthill by the Sea and the Galway International Food and Craft
Festival; level and objectives of the Reserve Fund; workshop on Fund; Volvo Ocean Race.
Mr. B. Barrett responded comprehensively to Members queries, and advised that the current reserve is
€568,000, which is to attract 'once in a lifetime' major events. Mr. B. Barrett advised that fund is being
allocated to support 'shoulder season' festivals, to extend the season, and advised that a Fåilte Ireland
funding scheme would also be available to applicants.
A number of Motions were tabled. Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator, advised Members to
proceed with Cllr. P. Keane's Motion initially.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Motion to approve recommendations of the CPG with no changes.
In favour — 8 Against - 9 Abstain — O
Present - 17
The Motion fell.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
I propose that the GIAF be increased from the recommended €10,000 to €15,000.
In favour— 17
Against - O Abstain— O
Present — 17
The Motion was carried.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That the allocation from the Marketing Fund be increased:
1) Salthill by the Sea — increased by €10,000, to €20,000
2) Galway International Food and Craft Festival —increased by €10,000 to €15,000.
In favour —9 Against - 8
Abstain — O
Present — 17
The Motion was carried.
71 Page
Item 4 (a) Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021, and (I) (ii) Housing
Quarterly Report ending March 2019
At 5.33pm, The Mayor proceeded to take Item 4 (a) Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021 and
inter alia, 4 (l) (ii) Housing Quarterly Report ending March 2019.
Cllr. M. Farrell asked if it was possible to extend beyond 6.00pm in order to finish this item. Mr. G.
McMahon, Meetings Administrator, advised that the agreed meeting time was 3.00pm to 6.00pm.
Members could suspend Standing Orders at 6.00pm, in order to extend the meeting. The Mayor
proposed to review Standing Orders at 6.00pm, in order to propose an extension.
Mr. D. Mahon presented an update on the Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021, and advised
Members that a Scheme of Affordable Letting would be on the Meeting Agenda of the SPC, and then
presented to the full Council.
At 6.00pm, the Mayor suspended Standing Orders to review an extension of the meeting to 6.30pm.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Motion to suspend Standing Orders in order to extend the meeting to 6.30pm
The Motion was agreed unanimously.
Queries and comments from Members included:
2019 targets; Affordable Housing Schemes; infill sites; Corrib Park; Modular Homes; housing crisis; land
bank of Galway City Council; homeless figures; vacant sites register; HAP scheme; anti-social behaviour;
RAS scheme; private developments; housing mix; rents; passing on of tenancies; student provision;
tenant liaison officers; notice to quit; Housing Taskforce; rural relocation; transfers; vetting of tenants;
provision for young working couples; tenancy agreements; allocations; Cül Trå; population density;
Rebuilding Ireland; management of estates; Urban Land Review; Murrough development.
At 6.30pm, Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator advised Members that Standing Orders permitted
an extension of the meeting to 7.30pm.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Motion to extend the meeting to finish the current item and Motions.
Abstain — O
Present — 15
Agreed — 11 Against — 4
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. P. Flannery and Cllr. D. McDonnell queried if the extension was in breach of Standing Orders, making
decisions invalid. The Mayor requested clarification from the Meetings Administrator, Mr. G. McMahon.
Mr. G. McMahon advised that it is within the Standing Orders to extend the meeting, to a limit of
7.30pm. The Standing Orders do not specify that the meeting must be 3.5hours long.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members queries. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members that
targets for housing delivery would not be reached without Members' approval of relevant Part 8s, and
that the number of appropriately zoned sites, which the Department would approve, were limited.
Targets would also be subject to funding and construction delays, which at times can be unforeseen and
beyond the control of Galway City Council. The need to balance sustainable communities means that
81
Page
some areas have reached saturation point in terms of provision e.g. the Ballyburke site. More details on
the Affordable Scheme would be presented to the SPC for review in due course. The CE report gives
Galway City Council's current position on infill development. Mr. D. Mahon clarified that no person
availing of the HAP scheme would be forced onto HAP or removed from the Housing list.
Mr. D. Mahon outlined costs to return vacant stock to use, which can be up to €30,000 per property.
Vacancy rates at present are 1.5% of the housing stock, with a target to reduce below this, while
acknowledging that there would always be some vacant stock, with people moving etc. Anti-social
behaviour is being addressed through two strategies recently adopted by Members, within the limits of
the legislation. Additional staff resources would be sought in the Budget, in order to manage increased
housing stock. Mr. D. Mahon advised that he would revert with the number of tenancy warnings. Mr. D.
Mahon advised that Galway City Council is not requesting underwriting under Rebuilding Ireland at the
moment, at the direction of the Department.
Item 4 — Consideration of Reports of Officials
b)
c)
d)
f)
g)
i)
j)
k)
Christmas Park and Ride. Not considered.
Review of the Christmas Market 2018. Not considered.
Proposed Variation to City Development Plan. Not considered.
Såilin to Silverstrand Project Update. Not considered.
Galway European Capital of Culture 2020. Not considered.
Update on Galway Transportation Strategy including Galway City Centre Traffic Management
Plan and Shop Street Refurbishment. Not considered.
National Ambulance Service Operations, including the Helipad at UCHG. Not considered.
Chief Executive's Reports:
i) Chief Executive's Report March 2019. Not considered.
ii) Chief Executive's Report April 2019. Not considered.
Quarterly Reports ending March 2019
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
Environment. Not considered.
Recreation & Amenity. Not considered.
Community. Not considered.
Culture & Economic Development. Not considered.
Transportation. Not considered.
Item 5 - Notices of Motion
The Mayor advised Members that he would not take Motions submitted by Members who were not
present. The Mayor proceed to take a vote on NOM 08/19:
NOM 08/19
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Galway City Council notes that:
Date Received: 14th March 2019
Seconded by: Councillors T. O'Flaherty; D. McDonnell;
O. Crowe; P. Keane; B. Cameron; N. Larkin;
M.J. Crowe; M. Farrell; M. Lohan; C. Ö Conchüir; C. Connolly.
• According to the Department of Housing there are 52 families in emergency accommodation
with just under 3,000 households on the Galway City Council Housing Waiting List;
• Rebuilding Ireland will provide funding for 2,067 social houses from 2019 to 2021, a third of
which will be long term leased privately owned units;
• The remainder of the housing list will be left in short term insecure RAS and HAP tenancies;
91 Page
•
•
Galway City Council calls on Government to:
-2
Latest available figures for 2018 for Galway saw increases in homelessness of between 40 — 55%
year on year;
The Traveller Accommodation Plan has neither been fully implemented nor funds fully drawn
down;
A cross party Dåil motion passed through the Dåil on October 3rd setting out a new direction for
housing policy;
The proposals in this motion were not incorporated into Budget 2019;
Important proposals to address the Housing Emergency have been put forward by a wide variety
of groups including the ONE Movement Cork, the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, the National
Housing and Homeless Coalition and Raise the Roof;
Rebuilding Ireland is not working and a new approach to housing is required to meet the needs
of all those locked out of the private market including young people, those on modest incomes
(but do not qualify for local authority homes), those on low pensions, those on Council waiting
lists, workers, women with children, Travellers, people with disabilities, older people and
students.
•
Declare the housing and homeless crisis an emergency;
Dramatically increase the supply of local authority led public and affordable housing (including
cost rental), by increasing capital spending on housing to €2.3bn; increase Part V requirements
to 20% in standard developments & 30% in Strategic Development Zones; prioritise the delivery
of public housing on public land; and aggressively target the return of vacant houses to active
use;
Implement fully the Traveller Accommodation Plan in Galway;
Reduce the flow of adults and children into homelessness with emergency legislation to make it
illegal for landlords, banks and investment funds to evict tenants and homeowners in mortgage
distress into homelessness; provide real security of tenure and real rent certainty by linking rent
reviews to an index such as the CPI and introducing measures to reduce the cost of rent;
introduce a target for ending long term homelessness and the need to sleep rough;
Ensure available funds
Establish a legal Right to Housing.
Abstain
Agreed — 11 Against — O
The Motion was passed.
Present
-13
NOM 2/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister
Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have
access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional
in the sector. Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high
quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are
struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone
to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not considered.
NOM 4/17
Notice given by:
Date Received:
10 | Page
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as
regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC
level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme.
With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost
importance that proper incentives are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and
that the legislation in place is as inclusive as possible".
Not considered.
NOM 9/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing
so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the
European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and
2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region
approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches
broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in
order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order
to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been
built by their efforts along with significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus
licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli
Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and
Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway".
Not considered.
11 |
Page
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new
criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators".
Not considered.
NOM 9/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct
hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge
it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget
Not considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the
Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong
practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 19th November 2018
"That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Ballinfoile Park to ascertain
the number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and bring forward plans /
options to eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates".
Not considered.
NOM 01/19 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 28th January 2019
' 'That Galway City Council consider providing funding in the 2020 budget to finance the provision of
dedicated park wardens in Galway City to ensure that our parks and in particular Terryland Forest
Park, Merlin Woods, Barna Woods, and Crestwood Park are monitored for anti social behaviour,
illegal dumping and tree felling."
Not considered.
NOM 02/19 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 30th January 2019
"That this Council reviews the issuing of parking permits in the Claddagh area. This review should
include the cost of the permit and the amount of permits issued to each residence. It should also
include the type of permit issued to carers and people who are visiting the sick. "
Not considered.
Notice of Motion from the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th February 2019:
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
12 IP age
Seconded: Cllrs. N. McNelis; O. Crowe; M. Lohan; D. Lyons;
P. Flannery; J. Walsh; N. Larkin; P. Keane; D. McDonnell & Cllr.
P. Conneely.
Following last weeks decision by An Bord Pleanala this Council calls on the HSE to immediately source
an alternative site on the grounds of Merlin Park for Galway Hospice.
Not considered.
NOM 04/19 Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 21st February 2019
As proposer of the motion to rezone a seven acre site on lands at Merlin Park Hospital to allow for a
Hospice, as part of the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023, I believe it's now of the upmost
importance that Galway City Council supports the Galway Hospice in seeking a judicial review of the
decision made by An Bord Pleanala to refuse planning permission for the move, and I propose that
the Council does everything in its power to support the Hospice's appeal.
Not considered.
NOM 09/19 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 27th March 2019
Galway City Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it by section 199 of the Local Government
Act 2001 hereby makes the following bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and
footpaths adjacent to service providers of abortion services within the City of Galway to exclude any
form of prohibited behaviour within a 500 meter area from the outer edge of the healthcare facility
For the purposes of these bye-laws, 'prohibited behaviour' shall include but not limited to:
(i) continuously or repeatedly observing a service provider or other person accessing a healthcare
facility.
(ii) continuously or repeatedly observing a healthcare facility.
(iii) engaging in threatening conduct directed at the service provider or a person known to them.
(iv)besetting, harassing, intimidating, interfering with, threatening, hindering, obstructing or impeding
a person who is attempting to enter a healthcare facility.
(v) in any way recording a service provider, or a person accessing, or attempting to access a
healthcare facility without that person's consent, or publishing or distributing a recording so
obtained, except in discharge of police duty.
(Vi) recording information about a person accessing, or attempting to access a healthcare facility
without that person's consent, or publishing or distributing information so obtained, except in
discharge of police duty.
(Vii) distributing or displaying any leaflets, pamphlets, notices, advertisements or other
documentation.
(viii) affixing bills, posters or stickers upon any wall, door, pole, structure, vehicle,
floor or pavement or on any surface forming part of, or used in relation to the healthcare facility.
(ix) conducting or taking part in public meetings, demonstrations or processions.
Not considered.
NOM 10/19
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: Joint Policing Committee Meeting, 25th March 2019
t propose that Galway City Council introduce the necessary Bye Laws to enforce the Control of Horses
Act, 1996 in Galway City.
Response issued with Agenda.
13 |
Page
Item 6 — Questions
Q 4/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
1st November 2018
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd
at the entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this
effect but no update has been given since.
Not considered.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
1st November 2018
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our
area LIS meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not considered.
Q 1/19 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
6th February 2019
Date Received:
It was agreed for the 2018 budget that funding be set aside for the provision of three 'wall ball'
hurling facilities, one in each ward in celebration of Galway's victory of the 2017 All Ireland minor and
senior hurling finals. Could we get an update on the progress of these projects, get confirmation of
the sites chosen and get definitive commencement and finishing dates of these projects for the
February 11th meeting of the council.
Response issued with Agenda.
Item 10 — Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations
Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were read out by Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator, and
were agreed unanimously.
Votes of Sympathy:
•
Kathleen O'Donovan, R,I.P.
Sean Armstrong, R.I.P.
Paddy Keogh, R.I.P.
Michael Hanlon, R.I.P.
Laura Brennan, R.I.P.
Tommy Garvey, R.I.P.
Martin Grealish, R.I.P.
John Joe Melody, R.I.P.
Jimmy Horan, R.I.P.
Mary Goonan, R.I.P.
Catherine Elizabeth (Betty) Hogan, R.I.P.
Brod Conneely, R.I.P.
Bill Gainer, R.I.P.
Votes of Congratulations:
• Seån Bén Breathnach
141
Page
• Lori Lightfoot
Appendix 1 — Questions submitted by Cllr. C. Connolly in relation to Item I(a) of the March Ordinary
Meeting. Not considered.
The meeting ended at 7.25pm.
Mi
15 | Page
d & Signa
Mayor of Galway
b'3t19i?,