Presiding
Present
Present
(virtually)
Apologies
Present
Present
1.
(virtually)
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Councii
held in the Atlantic Technological University (ATU) and virtually
on zoom platform on Mongey 8th of May 2023 at 3.009m.
-7
Mr.
Mr.
MS.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
MS.
Mr.
Ms.
MS.
MS.
Mr.
Mr.
Cllr. C. Higgins, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, A. Curran, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Connolly, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, N. Larkin,
N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
Cllr. l.
Byrne
O. Flynn, President, Atlantic Technolog-ical University
P. Philbin, Director of Services
P. Greene, Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
U. Finn, A/Director 07 Services
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
S. King, Assistant Staff Officer
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
H. Kilroy, A/Director of Services & Head of Finance
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
6. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Morgan, Atlantic Economic Corrid070fficer
M. Curran, Senior Resident Engineer
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
-j. Houlihan, Senior Executive Engineer
E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
F. Holland, Senior Engineer
L. Blake, A/Senior Planner
R. O'Reilly. Senior Executive Engineer
S. Connolly, Senior Engineer
Ä. Kenny, Administrative Officer
Ni Chülåin, Clerical Officei
C. O'Brien, OBFA Architects
C. Ryan, OBFA Architects
A.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Minutes, Cpnfirmed & Signd
Mayor of Galway
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator, commenced the meeting with a statement of
intent to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by
a moment of silent reflection.
Dr. Orla Flynn, President of ATU, welcomed all members to the campus and
expressed her gratitude to Brendan McGrath, Chief Executive and the staff of Galway
City Council for their collaboration and work with the ATU over the years. On behalf of
AT U, shesresented a token gift to the Chief Executive and wished him well on his
retirement.
Councillors expressed thanks to Dr. O'Flynn and wished her and ATU continued
success for the future.
Mr. B. McGrath thanked Dr. O. Flynn for the work they have done and congratulated
them on the success of ATU. He wished Dr. Flynn and her colleagues all the best for
the future and added that Galway City Council look forward to great collaboration into
the future.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons that the meeting conclude at 6.30pm and that a
break be taken at 4.45pm for fifteen minutes. This was seconded by Mayor C. Higgins
and agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 17th April, 2023
Mayor C. Higgins invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising.
Under Matters of Accuracy, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty advised that it was agreed by Council
to remove the initial wording "in its present format" from the Vote taken to reject the
proposed Ballyloughane Road/Renmore Avenue Active Travel Scheme. This was
seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe and agreed. Councillors discussed this matter and
expressed annoyance in relation to misinformation on social media which did not
reflect the debate or the decision taken by Council.
Cllrs. M. Cubbard & T. O'Flaherty sought responses to Questions that were on the
agenda for some time namely, Q8/2022 and QI /2023.
Under matters arising, Councillors raised queries regarding the Kingston and South
Park Master Plans. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Councillors receive a Report on the
two developments with a timescale on same. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Higgins
and agreed.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised. In relation to the
Kingston & Southpark projects, the Chief Executive committed to having a Report for
the June Ordinary meeting.
2
Proposed By: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr. E. Hoare
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 17th April 2023
L The minutes were agreed and adopted.
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 24th April, 2023
Mayor C. Higgins invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that Motion 17/2022 he submitted be temporarily removed
from the agenda and that the Motion he proposed at the Special meeting 'That the two
housing developments planned for Ballyburke and Clybaun Road Lower would be 80%
affordable housing and 20% social housing' be added to the agenda for the upcoming
Special meeting to consider Notices of Motions on 22nd May, 2023.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to the three motions she submitted at the Special meeting
and requested that the two Motion that were not considered at that meeting be noted
in the minutes and be included on the agenda for the upcoming Special meeting.
Mayor C. Higgins queried if there was any update for the request for Galway City
Council to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage Darragh O'Brien,
the Minister for Transport and the Minister for the Environment, Climate and
Communications, Eamon Ryan, and the Minister of State for the Department of
Housing, Local Govemment and Heritage, Kieran O'Donnell to urgently meet with
Galway City Councillors and Management to discuss issues impacting housing
delivery in Galway City.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator confirmed that both matters would be actioned
and advised that the request issued to the relevant Ministers had been acknowledged.
It was confirmed that contact was also made with the offices of the Ministers to
progress the request.
Proposed By: Cllr. D. yons
Seconded By: Cllr. E. Hoare
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 24th April, 2023
The minutes were Agreed and@gpted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Consideration of Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001
(as amended) Ref. No. LA 1/2023 for the proposed development at Church House
"The Manse" at 23 Nun's Island
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services introduced the proposed development to
Council.
Mr. C. O. Brien, OBFA Architects, gave a high-level presentation to Council on the
proposed development at Church House. Councillors discussed this item and raised
some queries and clarifications.
3
Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner outlined the detail in the Planning Report to
Council.
Councillors discussed the proposed development and raised a number of queries.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Mr. C. O'Brien and Mr. C. Ryan, OBFA
Architects, Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner, Mr. L. Blake, A/Senior Planner, Mr.
M. Curran, Senior Engineer and the Chief Executive responded to same.
Proposed
2(a) To Proceed with Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001
(as amended) Ref. No. LA 1/2023 for the proposed development at Church
House "The Manse" at 23 Nun's Island - per Report circulated 3rd May, 2023
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
This was agreed and approved by Council.
Cllr. M. J. Crowe put forward a Motion which was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare.
Seconded By: Cllr. E. Hoare
roposed By: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
That this Council calls on An Bord Pleanåla to accept Galway City Council's
Report in full on the Nuns Island Theatre project Ref LAI/2023 and allow
same proceed accordingly without further delay.
In Favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was carried.
2(b) Joint Policing Committee Annual Report for 2022
Seconded By: Cllr:mLyons
Proposed By: CllrvN. McNelis
2(b) Joint Policing Committee Annual Report for 2022
The Report was noted by Council.
Council took a break at 16:47 and the meeting resumed at 17:00
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Report on proposed new cemetery at Dublin Road
4
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer, gave a detailed presentation to Councillors
on the proposed New Cemetery on the Old Dublin Road. He advised that a Part 8
under the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) could be
brought before Council in due course if it was agreed by Council to progress plans
for a new cemetery for the city at Dublin Road.
Councillors discussed this Agenda item in detail and raised some concerns, queries
and clarifications. Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that the cemetery be named 'Renmore
cemetery' rather than referring to it as the 'new cemetery'. Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
suggested that Galway City and County Council, who jointly own the airport site,
should investigate the possibility of using the land at Carnmore as a new burial
ground.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive & Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner, responded to
same.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed the following Motion. Cllr. D. McDonnell called for a Roll
Call Vote and subsequently withdrew this request.
Proposed By: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded By: Cllr. A. Curran
I propose that we do not proceed with the Dublin Road as a site for the new
cemetery.
In Favour: 2 Against: 14 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was defeated.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed the following Motion 'I propose that Galway City Council
explore other public lands to replace the playing pitch being lost to this project. Cllr.
D. McDonnell suggested that all the words 'other public lands' be replaced with 'all
lands'. This was accepted by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Proposed Sy: Cllr. MICubbard
Seconded Sy: Cllr. FIFahy
I propose that Galway City Council explore lands to replace the playing pitch
being lost to this project.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was carried.
It was agreed by Council that the proposed site for the new cemetery will now
proceed to detailed design.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that Crown Square be put on the Agenda for the
upcoming Special meeting scheduled for Monday 22nd May. It was also requested
that Correspondence from the Western Inter-County Railway Committee received
28th June 2022 to consider nomination of up to four Galway City Council Elected
5
Members to this Committee be added to the agenda. This was seconded by Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty and agreed.
4(b) Coirib go Cösta Galway City Flood Relief Scheme Update
Cllr. N. Murphy proposed that Standing Orders be suspended, and the meeting be
extended until the presentation is heard. This was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis and
agreed. It was also agreed that any questions/clarifications would be sent in writing
to the Meetings Administrator, if desired.
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services gave an introduction to Council. Mr. R. O'Reilly,
Senior Executive Engineer proceeded to give a detailed presentation on the Coirib
go Cösta Galway City Flood Relief Scheme.
4(c) Chief Executive's Report: - Not Considered
(i) April 2023 - issued
(ii) May 2023 - to follow
4(d) Quarterly Reports - January to March 2023 - Not Considered
(iii) Economic, Community & Cultural Development
(iv) Environment & Climate Change
(v) Housing
(vi) Recreation & Amenity
(vii) Transport & Infrastructure
4(e) Local Government Boundary Arrangements for Galway City Council - Not
Considered
4(f) Draft Galway City Council Protocol on Civic Commemorations - Not Considered
4(g) Crown Square Update - Not Considered
4(h) EPA Focus on Local Authority Environmental Enforcement - Performance
Report 2021 - Not Considered
4(i) National Oversight and Audit commission (NOAC) Galway City Council Scrutiny
Report - copy issued 6th January, 2023 - Not Considered
4(j) Proposed Galway City Council Cycling Enhancement Project at Ballyloughane Road
— Not Considered
6
5. NOTICES OF MOTION - Not Considered
NOM 812022
Submitted b Cllr. A. Cheevers on the 16th Ma 2022
I am calling on Galway County Council to have full consultation with Galway City
Council public representatives in relation to the Master Plan for the Galway Airport
Site.
I believe that as it is jointly owned with the county council the city council need to
have full consultation in this rocess and it should not be solel for Count Council.
NOM 18/2021 submitted under SO 34 at Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 7th A ril 2021 Amended wordin 30th Ma 2022
That Galway City Council to permanently pedestrianise cross street and that would
be from the Dåil Bar to Supermacs and to work with businesses to ensure the safety
for pedestrians and cyclists.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the agenda. The Motion was
deferred at a Special meeting held on 30th May 2022 and a Report is to be brought
to Council on the matter.
NOM 12/2022
Submitted by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty on the 7th June, 2022
Seconded b : Cllr. D. McDonnell on 13th June, 2022
We propose that Galway City Council reject the proposals set out in the
Ballyloughane Road /Renmore Avenue Active Travel Scheme in its present
format; that the Council Executive have further discussions with the two national
schools, Gaelscoil Dara and Scoil Chaitriona, together with representatives of
local residents, sporting organisations and other stakeholders to bring forward an
Active Travel Scheme which accommodates the needs of and ensures the
a reement of all interested arties.
NOM 13/2022
Submitted b Cllr. N. McNelis on the 7th June 2022
That Galway City Council will call on the Ministers for Justice; Education; and
Children, Disability, Equality & Integration to immediately implement an Operation
Encompass-style programme between An Garda Siochåna and schools.
Operation Encompass is a police-led, school-based early intervention
safeguarding scheme which supports children and young people who experience
Domestic Abuse. Operation Encompass was created to ensure that by the start of
the next school day, a child's school will be informed that there has been a police-
attended incident of domestic abuse at the home of the child. The child is then
supported immediately upon arrival at school.
In 2020, Women's Aid (Ireland) reported that there were 30,841 disclosures of
abuse including 5,948 were against children. We need to support these children
now. www.o erationencom ass.or
7
NOM 14/2022
Submitted by Cllr. N. Murphy on the 25th June 2022
That Galway City Council will write to the Advertising Standards Authority for
Ireland to complain that the short-term letting platform Airbnb is carrying
advertisements for properties within the Galway Rent Pressure Zone which are in
breach of lannin re ulations.
NOM 16/2022
Submitted by Terry O'Flaherty on the ISt Sept 2022
We propose that item 4(a) Consideration of reports of Officials for the proposed
Galway City Council Active Travel project for the Ballyloughane Road and
Renmore Avenue that this item will not be discussed until full consultation has
taken place with all of all the stakeholders that will be greatly affected by this
scheme if it goes ahead.
Signed by: Cllrs. Terry O' Flaherty, Alan Cheevers, Noel Larkin, Michael Crowe,
Declan Mc Donnell.
NOM 17/2022
Submitted by Cllr. D. L ons on the 10th Oct 2022
I request Galway City Council to progress the installation of a lighted pedestrian
crossing on the Barna Road at the laneway that exits from the Rusheen Woods to
the Barna Road. This laneway since upgraded is widely used by residents who
walk the back Promenade. It is my understanding that the necessary drawings
have been completed for some time for a pedestrian crossing at this location.
Reply Issued: 5th April 2023
Cllr D.L ns Re uested NOM 17/2022 to be resubmitted 10th A ril 2023
NOM 19/2022
Submitted b Cllr. D. Lyons on the 7th Nov 2022
I request Galway City Council to immediately begin the process of the Taking-ln-
Charge of the laneway linking Ballymoneen Road to the Rosard estate which is
adjacent to the grounds of St. John the Apostle Church and the Monalee Heights
estate.
NOM 20/2022
Submitted by Cllr. A. Cheevers on the 29th Nov 2022
That this council is concerned in relation to the operation of the transport division
of the City Council and calls on the CEO to carry out an urgent review of its
operations and to report back to the next Council meeting with proposals to
improve the delivery of transport projects of all types in the City and to improve
consultation with the elected members and ublic alike.
NOM 01/2023
Submitted by Cllr. E. Hoare on the 10th January 2023
That Galway City Council review and urgently address the flooding issues that
continue to persist at the playing pitches in South Park. This is a serious health
and safety issue and is impacting on the uses of the playing pitches during periods
of heav rainfall.
8
NOM 02/2023
Submitted by Cllr. E. Hoare on the 10th Janua 2023
That Galway City Council commit to constructing a pedestrian crossing at Dangan
and another at Bushypark along the N59. This is a very dangerous location and
edestrian crossin s would make it safer for all road users.
NOM 03/2023
Submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly on the 11th January 2023
Galway City Council calls on the NTA to ensure that bus shelters installed in
Galway include end panels at both ends of the shelter to provide maximum
rotection from the elements.
NOM 04/2023
Submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly on the 11th January 2023
Galway City Council requests the NTA to attend a meeting of Galway City Council
to discuss the provision of bus licences within Galway City prior to conducting the
review of the Galwa Trans ortation Strate
NOM 06/2023
Submitted by Cllr. A. Curran on the 10th April 2023
That Galway City Council would as a matter of public safety, with immediate effect,
reallocate space from the hard shoulder and carriageway width on the R338
Oranmore Coast Road, from the junction of the old Dublin Road to the end of the
city border on the R338, in order to provide safe walking and cycling space. That
the Council would achieve this by carrying out the following actions:
clearing the existing hard shoulders of weeds, shrubs, overhanging
branches, and other vegetation, mud and any matter organic and inorganic,
in order to maximise the space available,
removing all construction debris, rubbish, and other impediments to safe
use,
filling in all potholes and resurfacing the hard shoulders so that they are
smooth and level, and safe for pedestrians, wheelchair users, buggies and
bicycles,
creating segregation between the road carriageway and the walking/cycling
space by the use of bollards and planters.
This action is to be recognised as the first of several steps in the creation of proper
Active Travel routes i.e. footpaths and bike lanes, for those living, working, or
attendin school in the area.
NOM 07/2023
Submitted by Cllr. A. Curran on the 11th April 2023
This Council calls for the following actions concerning residential land, vacant land
registers, and vacancy officers:
a) The development of comprehensive masterplans for all zoned residential land
that has not been built on or have valid lannin a lications, ensurin efficient
9
and sustainable use of land for housing development, infrastructure, public
transport, and community facilities.
b) A thorough review and justification for why each parcel of residential zoned land
that has not been built on is not on the vacant land register, with the aim to rectify
discrepancies or omissions and provide transparent information on the register.
c) To ask the Minister in the Department for Housing, Local Government and
Heritage, Darragh O'Brien, for additional funding for the immediate hiring of
additional vacancy officers to improve the identification of vacant properties and
land, and to enforce levies effectively, thereby promoting the development of
vacant and underutilised properties and contributing to the city's housing supply.
By implementing these measures, Galway City Council aims to promote
responsible and sustainable development of residential land and encourage the
use of vacant and underutilised properties in contributing to the city's
rowth and vitalit
NOM 08/2023
Submitted b Cllr. A. Curran on the 26th April 2023
That Galway City Council will develop and implement a policy with a view to
delivering TeenSpaces in communities all over the city whereby teenagers can
hang out in a safe and fun manner and to investigate how our current assets can
be made more teena er friendl
NOM 09/2023
Submitted by Cllr. T. O Flaherty on the ISt May 2023
I call on Galway City Council to put in place safety measures in line with safety first
at both Scoil Chatriona and Scoil Dara , Renmore.
NOM 11/2022 - Resubmitted May 2023
Submitted b Cllr. D. L ons on the 2022
I request Galway City Council to enter immediate discussions with relevant land
owners on the Upper Ballymoneen Road so as to acquire sufficient lands by
negotiation or by Compulsory Purchase Order so that a bus turning bay can be
installed which will permit a bus service operation on the Upper Ballymoneen
Road serving the following estates; Sli Burca, Leitir Burca, Leas na Mara, Drisfn,
Maoilin, Sli Gheal, Fana Bui, Radharc na Farraige, Magh Burca, Ard Cre and a
number of other estates now in construction and further developments due to take
lace on Ball moneen Road in the future.
6. QUESTIONS - Not Considered
Q8/2022
Submitted by Cllr. M. Cubbard on the 19th June 2022
Can the council provide a list of all masterplans/projects that have been approved
by council for the Recreation & Amenity department and give the following
information on each:
Adoption Date,
• Estimated bud et,
10
• Funding available as of 19/06/22,
Timeline for com letion
QI/2023
Submitted b Cllr. T. O'Flahert on the 7th February 2023
What is the reason for the delay in constructing the changing shelter proposed for
Ballyloughane Beach?
A sum of €40,000 was included for this project in the 2021 Galway City Council
budget, but while other projects agreed at the same time have gone ahead, there
is not even a reference made to the Ballyloughane changing facility and the long
overdue new toilets in the Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2023.
Q2/2023
Submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly on the 20th February 2023
"What was the total expenditure incurred by the parks and environment sections
respectively in the provision of overtime services in 2022?"
Q3/2023
Submitted by Cllr. N. Murphy on the ISt April 2023
My question relates to the new "cost rental backstop" whereby the council or an
Approved Housing Body (AHB) will purchase the home of renters who are not in
receipt of HAP or RAS but who are facing homelessness due to the sale of the
property. I realise that initially the AHBs will not be involved, and the council will
be empowered to purchase the property. What extra resources (e.g. manpower
and budgetary) is the council devoting to ensure this and how long will it be until
the council have the infrastructure in lace to start makin urchases?
Q4/2023
Submitted by Cllr. N. McNelis on the 10th of April 2023
Can Galway City Council urgently look at the design of Upr and Lwr Clybaun Road
and Upr and Lwr Ballymoneen roads as pedestrian crossings at this roundabouts
are not safe and the speed coming off these is very high.
Elected members of the West Ward met with Garda Superintendent last week and
also raised this but there needs to be a desi n chan eto make these areas safe.
11
7. CORRESPONDENCE - Not Considered
(a) Correspondence from Western Inter-County Railway Committee received 28th
June 2022 — To consider nomination of up to four Galway City Council Elected
Members to this Committee
(b) Correspondence received 18th April 2023 from Office of the Planning Regulator
(c) Correspondence received 20th April 2023 regarding a motion passed at Wexford
County Council Meeting
(d) Correspondence received 25th April 2023 regarding a motion passed at
Westmeath County Council Meeting
(e) Correspondence received 25th April 2023 from Minister Darragh O'Brien
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION - Not Considered
None
9. CONFERENCES - Not Considered
None
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS - Not Considered
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Cllr. A. Cheevers referred to a Motion that he submitted under Standing Order no. 34 for the
purpose of dealing with urgent business 'In light of the World Health Organisation downgrading
the COVID-19 pandemic and declaring it is no longer a global emergency. I propose that
effective from June 16, 2023 the AGM, all meeting s of Galway City Council, including Strategic
Policy Committees, Joint Policing Committee and other associated meetings of the Council
return to the Council Chamber in City Hall with a Hybrid option to remain in place for elected
members, staff and media to avail of should they wish to do so.' He requested that this motion
be placed on the agenda for the upcoming Special meeting scheduled for Monday 22nd May,
2023. This was noted.
The meeting concluded at 18:38.
12