DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
held on Monday 8th July, 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, F.
Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty and P. O'Reilly.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, Director of Services
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
L. Hynes, Finance/ Management Accountant
Ms.
Ms.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Cllr.
N. Larkin
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.06pm by welcoming Members, and advising of his intention to
take a 15 minute break at 5.15pm, and to review the need for an extension at 7.30pm. This was agreed.
The Mayor proposed to take the Agenda as follows: Item 1, Item 2 (a), (b), (c), (d), and to defer Item 2 (e)
to the September meeting to allow time to review a substantial number of submissions. The Mayor then
proposed to take Section 34 Motions, which were deferred from the June Ordinary Meeting, and then to
proceed to Item 4 (c), (d), (a) and then to follow the Agenda for the remaining items.
A discussion on deferring Item 2 (e) ensued, and a vote was taken.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Motion to take Item 2 (e) Draft Street Performance & Busking Bye-Laws 2019 at this meeting.
In favour: 4 Against: 12 Abstain: O
Present: 16
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed by: Mayor Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to proceed with the original proposal of the Mayor regarding the Agenda, to take items in the
following order: Item 1 (a), Item 2 (a), (b), (c), (d), defer Item 2 (e) to September, Section 34 motions,
Item 4 (c), (d), (a) and follow the Agenda thereafter.
In favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O
Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
Item 1 — Confirmation of Minutes
The Mayor invited matters of accuracy on Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City
Council, 24th June 2019. The Meetings Administrator advised of an error in the Minutes, and advised that
the Members were elected to the Joint Policing Committee, not the Board of the JPC as recorded in the
Minutes. This error would be corrected. The Meetings Administrator advised that the error in relation to
the name of Corrib Park had also been corrected in the previous minutes.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested that Matters of Accuracy be reintroduced in the Minutes. The Chief Executive
advised that Matters of Accuracy are not referred to in the Standing Orders in relation to dealing with
Minutes.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
I propose to adopt Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 24th June 2019.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 16
Item 1 Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 24th June 2019, were adopted.
Item 2 (a) Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section
211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act 2000 —
Disposal of premises by way of lease at 1 — 4 Tui Bhriain, Shantalla,
Galway to Simon Community (Galway).
Mr. D. Mahon reported on Item 2 (a), Disposal of premises by way of lease at 1-4 Tui Bhriain, Shantalla,
Galway to Simon Community (Galway). He advised that the units are currently leased to the Simon
Community, as a key part of housing services in the city. Mr. D. Mahon recommended to Members to
agree to Item 2 (a).
A discussion on the Item ensued, with queries and comments from Members including: extension of the
lease in 5 years and compliance with planning. Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members'
queries.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Approval of Item 2 (a) Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Local
Government (Planning & Development) Act 2000 — Disposal of premises by way of lease at 1—4 Tui
Bhriain, Shantalla, Galway to Simon Community (Galway).
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
Item 2 (a) was approved.
Item 2 (b) Audit Report for 2018
Ms. N. Moggan reported on the Audit Report for 2018, and advised that the Annual Financial Statement
had been circulated separately. Ms. N. Moggan reported that the report is a positive report, which
demonstrates huge fiscal responsibility, with funding allocated by Members for significant capital projects,
and loan balances reducing significantly. Ms. N. Moggan advised that the Audit Committee would meet in
the coming week, and would report to Members in Quarter 4 if any issues were to be brought to the
attention of the full Council.
21 Page
Queries and comments from Members included:
Income and rent collection levels; annual review of rents; commercial rent review; local government rent
audit; ethics declarations; debt recovery management; property interest register; procurement and
contracts tendered; retrofitting of Council homes; Irish Water; Affordable Housing and Approved Housing
Bodies; development levies; Galway 2020; interest only facility; shared service agreements with County,
including Fire Services; capital debt; Motion re meeting Minister regarding debt on Ballymoneen lands;
Land aggregation scheme; Leisureland; PRTB; software for housing reviews; max rent per week; extent of
residential zoned land for outer bypass.
Ms. N. Moggan, Mr. D. Mahon and Mr. G. McMahon responded comprehensively to Members' queries.
Mr. D. Mahon agreed to recirculate a report on Land Loans which was originally circulated in November
2018. The Chief Executive reiterated that the Audit Report is a very positive report, showing the finances
of the City Council are in a positive position.
The Mayor proposed a Motion Of Sympathy on the loss of Ms. N. Moggan's mother, Mary. The Motion
was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy, and agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Adoption of Item 2 (b) Audit Report for 2018.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
Item 2 (b) was approved.
Item 2 (c) Draft SPC Scheme
Mr. G. McMahon reported on the Draft Strategic Policy Committee scheme, which proposed 5 SPCs be
formed for Galway City. The draft scheme had been circulated for consideration, and subject to the
agreement of Members, would go on public display and for sectoral consultation, including the PPN, trade
union, construction and business sectors.
Clarifications requested by Members included:
Nominations to sit on SPCs; sectoral representatives sitting on two committees; cultural representation;
social inclusion; Climate Change; addition of 6th SPC; number of meetings; changing SPCs; meeting with
County SPCs;
Mr. G. McMahon responded comprehensively to Members' queries. The Chief Executive committed to
arranging a meeting of City and County SPCs in due course.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
To circulate Draft SPC scheme for consultation.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was approved.
Item 2 (d) Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019—2024.
Mr. D. Mahon presented on the Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019-2024, including
amendments. The Draft was issued in April 2018, before going to public consultation. Mr. D. Mahon
advised Members that the adoption of the Programme was being sought today.
3 IP age
The Mayor invited questions.
Clarifications and questions from Members included:
Culturally Appropriate Sites; refurbishment of houses; definition of indigenous; Halting Site Estate
Management Strategy; transient sites; submissions; breaches of Human Rights; HAP; CENA; transfers;
housing targets; Carrowbrowne; planning permission; provision of footpaths/ street lights to Ballindooley;
increase in traveller families in Galway; Tullamore CENA site; locations for housing; halting sites; group
housing schemes; Fåna Glas; Birr traveller accommodation; maintenance issues in halting sites; illegal
dumping; Cül Trå; participation in consultation; Circular Road; horses; Sliabh Rua; Curraghline site; links
with Mayo County Council; 2012 report on condition of houses;
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members queries.
At 4.30pm, the Mayor left the Chair, and Deputy Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair. At 4.33pm, the
Mayor resumed the Chair.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Motion to Adopt the Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019-2024
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 2 (d) Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2019-2024 was adopted.
Section 34 Motions
At 5.28pm, the Mayor proposed to take Section 34 Motions, which had been previously submitted at the
June Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council.
The Meetings Administrator clarified the meaning of Standing Order 34, which refers to items being taken
as a matter of urgency, with many taken without debate, however this is not a requirement of Standing
Order 34. The Chief Executive advised that he had repeatedly advised against developing policy through
Standing Order 34 Motions.
The Mayor read out NOM 18/2019, for which a response had issued earlier that afternoon. The Mayor
proposed to leave NOM 18/2019 on the agenda for the September 2019 meeting. This was agreed.
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T.
O'Flaherty, D. Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of
civil society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
41 Page
Response issued 8th July 2019. Remain on Agenda for September 2019 Meeting.
The Mayor read out NOM 28/2019, and advised that a response had also issued. The Mayor proposed to
refer the Motion to the Procedures Committee.
NOM 28/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Owen Hanley
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, P. O'Reilly, M. O'Connor, N. Larkin, C. Connolly, D.
Lyons, D. McDonnelly, T. O'Flaherty, M. Cubbard
Date Received: 14th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognise the importance of making decision processes as transparent and
ease-of-use friendly.
Therefore, this Council shall record all Passed Motions during the main Council meetings, as well as
any special meetings and the Annual Meeting, for the purposes of uploading into a specific section
available on the Galway City Council website.
•
•
That the Section be broken into Council terms and list individual motions.
That motions within that subsection be listed in Chronological order from most recent to oldest
That they be recorded in full with Councillors votes included.
For the purposes of this motions that this recording shall begin on the day this motion would be
passed and here after, but not require a retroactive record of previously passed motions at this
point.
Response Issued 8th July 2019, Motion referred to the Procedures Committee.
A discussion on the removal of Motions from the agenda once a response has issued took place. Cllr. D.
Lyons observed that if a response is issued after an Agenda has been circulated, this is not covered in
Standing Orders. The Chief Executive advised Members to address issues with Standing Orders through
the Procedures Committee.
The Mayor proceeded to take NOM 30/2019. Cllr. O. Hanley withdrew the Motion.
NOM 30/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Owen Hanley
Supported by Cllrs: T. O'Flaherty, D. Lyons, N. McNelis, P. O'Reilly, M. O'Connor, N.
Larkin, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, F. Fahy, M. Cubbard
Date Received: 14th June 2019
That Galway City Council implement a wider strategy of opening the city centre more to the east side
of the city in existing and future developments. And in light of that:
• The Council shall develop a strategy proposal for the train pathway that connects Renmore
and the Train Station/City Centre, as well the surrounding areas, as a proper movement
corridor for residents.
• Such a strategy should plan and assess infrastructure, environmental, and anti-social needs
with consultation with residents and interested bodies.
The Motion was Withdrawn.
The Mayor proceeded to take NOM 32/2019, and proposed to take the motion without debate. This was
agreed.
NOM 32/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Supported by Cllrs: O. Hanley, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty, D. McDonnelly, P.
O'Reilly, N. Larkin, M. Cubbard, M. O'Connor, P. Keane, A. Cheevers, F. Fahy.
5 IP age
Date Received: 17th June 2019
That GCC calls on the Government to ensure that the National Minimum Wage (Protection of
Employee Tips) Bill 2017 is enacted as a matter of priority.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor proceeded to take NOM34/2019. A discussion on whether to take the NOM with or without
debate ensued. The Mayor proposed to defer the Motion to the September meeting. This was agreed.
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley,
T. O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her
Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their
personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal
autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
Not considered.
The Mayor proceeded to take NOM 31/2019. A discussion on a response to NOM13/2019 included in the
Agenda pack, and the similarity of the wording, ensued. The Mayor proposed to defer the Motion to the
September meeting in order to review the wording of the two Motions.
NOM 31/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 17th June 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Supported by Cllrs. N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, N. Larkin,
M. Cubbard, M. O'Connor, F. Fahy.
That GCC calls on the Government to commit to:
Greater urgency in setting up the Judicial Council to review levels of awards for personal injuries.
Awards for soft tissue injuries must be brought down significantly in line with international norms.
A zero tolerance approach to fraud with the setting up of a dedicated central Gardai resource
specifically tasked with investigating fraudulent cases for potential prosecution.
Not considered.
The Mayor proceeded to take NOM 36/2019, as amended. Cllr. J. Connolly requested the Motion be taken
with debate, in order to discuss the raising of flags outside City Hall.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Motion to open NOM 36/2019 to debate.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 17
61 Page
A discussion on a flag policy ensued. The Chief Executive proposed that the Motion be deferred to
September, and confirmed that the Rainbow Flag had been raised in previous years, and would be again if
a request was made. The Meetings Administrator advised that a flag policy should be discussed by the
Procedures Committee, in light of additional foreign dignitaries visiting City Hall in relation to Galway2020.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that the issue of lighting up of public buildings also be included.
NOM 36/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard
Supported by: Cllrs. P. O'Reilly, C. Connolly, N. McNelis, D. Lyons, T. O'Flaherty,
M. O'Connor, D. McDonnell, J. Connolly, A. Cheevers.
Date Received: 28th June 2019
"That Galway City Council recognises the important contribution made to this city by LGBT+ citizens
and rejects in all its forms discrimination against the LGBT+ community.
To show support for equality and acceptance this Council shall raise the Rainbow Flag on August 12th
until the 19th for Galway Pride's 30th year, Ireland's longest consecutive Pride. And shall do so
annually hereafter.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
At 6.00pm the meeting went into Recess.
The meeting recommenced at 6.24pm, with Item 4 (c) Nuns Island Development.
Item 4 (c) Nuns Island Development
Mr. B. Saunders, Assistant Director, Buildings & Estates, NUI Galway, gave a presentation on the Nuns
Island Masterplan.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Building heights; student accommodation; car park ownership; river crossings; urban Gaeltacht;
consultation; planning process; funding; residential and cultural mix; cycling infrastructure; Education in
Nuns Island; Fisheries Field; environmental sensitivity; Mills; timescale; graveyards; Masterplan for the
city; Climate Change; old gaol; shared surfaces; ownership of land; Land Development Agency proposal;
Galway Transport Strategy; Ice House; and the role of GCC planners in the Masterplan.
Mr. B. Saunders responded comprehensively to Members questions, and advised Members that
submissions were welcome. The Chief Executive advised that the presentation was for information
purposes, as an opportunity to engage with NUI Galway. The Masterplan would go to the Planning SPC,
and a draft document would go to public consultation later in 2019.
Item 4 (d) Shop Street Pilot Restoration Project
Mr. J. Callan reported on the Shop Street Pilot Restoration Project, with an update on a trial section which
was completed in June 2019.
At 7.30pm, Cllr. D. Lyons proposed an extension of time to 8.45pm. This was seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell and agreed.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Costs; enforcement in relation to dumping of oils; permits for trucks; bollards; next steps; utilities access;
newsletter updates; removal of HGVs; human remains; working hours; bye-laws in relation to access by
the Skeff Hotel; tarmac finish; previous contractors; night deliveries; waste collection; loading bays;
71 Page
collection depot; electric vehicles/ trollies; Irish Water; tour guides; wayfinding; street furniture; recycling
of paving; through traffic; windows of opportunity to complete works;
The Chief Executive and Mr. J. Callan responded comprehensively to Members queries, and advised that
the Public Realm Strategy and design work being undertaken by the Council's consultants would further
enhance the area when complete.
Item 4 (f) Proposed New Cemetery
Ms. C. Kilcoyne gave an update on the proposed New Cemetery site. Queries and comments from
Members included:
Budget; timeline; size; replacement R&A land; cemetery on West of city; traffic/ access; consultation; off
street parking.
At 8.25, the Mayor left the Chair, and Deputy Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair. The Mayor resumed the
Chair at 8.27pm.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne responded comprehensively to Members' queries.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
I propose the new cemetery site goes to Part VIII.
In favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: O
Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Item 9 — Conferences
Conferences were proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
Title: The Parnell Society, Summer School 2019
1)
Date: 11th -15th August 2019
Venue: Avondale House Rathdrum, Co. Wicklow
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. Declan McDonnell
Approved Training:
1)
2)
Title: AILG Module 3 — Induction Training Elected Members
Date & Venue: 11th July, 2019 - Mullingar Park Hotel, Mullingar (Midland & Eastern Region)
Date & Venue: 13th July, 2019 —Horse & Jockey Hotel, Co. Tipperary (Southern Region)
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Declan McDonnell,
Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Eddie Hoare, Cllr. Clodagh Higgins, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Alan Cheevers, Cllr.
Pauline O'Reilly & Cllr. Colette Connolly
Title: AILG Autumn Training Seminar 2019
Date: 11th & 12th September 2019
Venue: Hillgrove Hotel, Old Armagh Road, Monaghan
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty,
Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Eddie Hoare & Cllr. Clodagh Higgins
81 Page
Item IO — Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations
Votes of Sympathy/ congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe and
agreed.
Sympathies:
Michael Brogan, R.I.P.
Julie Hornibrook, R.I.P.
Cathy Cogley (nee Cloherty), R.I.P.
Bernadette Kane, R.I.P.
Imelda Brennan, R.I.P.
John Walsh, R.I.P.
Eileen Keating, R.I.P.
Congratulations:
• Galway LGFA Senior Football Team
• Aoibhe Crowe & Claregalway Girls U14 Football Team
At 8.45pm, the Mayor closed the meeting.
Item 2 — Business Prescribed by Statute
(e) Draft Street Performance & Busking Bye-Laws 2019. Not considered.
Item 3 — Reports of Committee Meetings
None
Item 4 - Consideration of Reports of Officials
(a) LED Street Light Replacement Programme. Not considered.
(b) Update on the Irish Language Plan. Not considered.
(e) Sailin to Silverstrand Coastal Protection Scheme. Not considered.
(g) To consider a submission to public consultation on the Western Rail Corridor. Not considered.
(h) Consultation Paper on the Control of Dogs. Not considered.
(i) Chief Executive's Report
June 2019. Taken as Noted (Standing Order 14)
July 2019. Not considered.
ii.
(j) Quarterly Report, April to June 2019
ii.
iv.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure. Not considered.
Housing. Not considered.
Environment & Climate Change. Not considered.
Recreation & Amenity. Not considered.
Economic Development & Culture. Not considered.
Community & Sports Development. Not considered.
91 Page
Item 5 — Notices of Motion
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty,
D. Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity emergency
is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of civil
society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. Motion to remain on Agenda for September 2019 Meeting.
NOM 19/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning,
Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
• Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
• Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority Area
for the display of authorised election material
• That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
• That all election candidates be given equal space for display
• That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down by
law
Not considered.
NOM 21/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the devolved Scottish Government to immediately withdraw threats made
against Irish Fishermen fishing legally in the waters around the island of Rockall. Further we call on the Irish
Government to ensure the protection of Irish Fishermen currently fishing waters there.
Not considered.
NOM 23/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council develop a segregated Cycle Lane along the Western Distributor Rd between the
junction of Cappagh Rd and Millers Lane.
Not considered.
101 Page
NOM 24/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
This Council calls on the Minister for Education to reinstate History as core mandatory subject of the Junior
Cycle.
Not considered.
NOM 31/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 17th June 2019
That GCC calls on the Government to commit to:
Greater urgency in setting up the Judicial Council to review levels of awards for personal injuries. Awards
for soft tissue injuries must be brought down significantly in line with international norms.
A zero tolerance approach to fraud with the setting up of a dedicated central Garda( resource specifically
tasked with investigating fraudulent cases for potential prosecution.
Not considered.
NOM 33/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 24th June 2019
That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence as
a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal,
Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farrajge, Drisfn and Mhaoilin located on
the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway.
Not considered.
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her Department
acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their personal
information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal autonomy
rights of other citizens in Ireland.
Not considered.
NOM 37/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 1st July 2019
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to deliver on a 2008 Labour Court ruling to provide
pension entitlement to supervisors on Community Employment schemes in the state. The Government's
inaction on the 2008 decision is totally undermining the Labour Court and causing undue hardship to
supervisors that made no alternative arrangements on foot of this historical Court decision.
Not considered.
Mi
ed & Signed
, Cor
Mayor of Galway
111 Page
Item 6 - Questions
Q4/2019
Question given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 26th June 2019
I wish to seek an explanation from City Council officials for the delay in advancing plans for the design
and construction of the Commemorative Arch to be located on the riverside walk at O'Brien's Bridge,
considering the fact that €70,000 has been ring-fenced for this project, and to seek a full report on the
current state of progress.
Not considered.
Item 7 — Correspondence
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(j)
Seminar notice - Midlands Regional Transition Team in conjunction with the Eastern & Midlands
CARO & Local Enterprise Office Offaly. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Gear6id Ö Conluain, National University of Ireland, Galway. Not
considered.
Letter received from Padraic Faherty, 10th June 2019. Not considered.
Clare Co Co Notice of Motion, received 21st June 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government on 13th May
2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Department of Justice & Equality on 17th June 2019. Not
considered.
Correspondence received from Office of the Minister for Justice & Equality on 24th June 2019. Not
considered.
NOAC Local Authority Satisfaction Survey 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission on 27th June 2019. Not
considered.
Correspondence & memorial card received from The Brennan Family on 26th June 2019. Not
considered.
Correspondence from Portershed to May Economic SPC. Not considered.
Item 8 — Items for Councillors' Information
(a) National Day of Commemoration, Sunday 14th July 2019. Not considered.
(b) 6th Festival of History — 31st La Touche Legacy Weekend, 13th & 14th September 2019. Not
considered.
(c) Correspondence received from Register of Lobbying on 25th June 2019 re Regulation of Lobbying Act
2015 (the Act) — URelevant bodies" operating under the Transparency Code. Not considered.
Item 11 — Other Business Set Forth in the Notice Convening the
Meeting
None.
Item 12 — Any Other Business
(a) Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
AdvisoryGroupof.Ballinfoile Castlegar&ighbourhood Centre
2 positions as per request of the Advisory Group.+O representative for the Central Ward and
ppointment by Vote).
One representative for the East Ward. (Non Group —
Not co sidered.
12 | Page