1 
   
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council,  
held on Monday 8th September, 2014 
 at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway. 
 
 
Presiding: 
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of Galway. 
 
Present: 
Cllrs. B. Cameron, C. Ó Conchúir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. 
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, A. Marley, D. 
McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh 
 
In Attendance:           Mr. B. McGrath, City Manager, 
 
 
 
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, 
   
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms. N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance, 
 
 
Mr. B. Dunne, A/Director of Services, 
 
 
Mr. R. Brennan, A/Director of Services, 
 
 
 
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator, 
 
 
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner, 
 
 
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner, 
 
 
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer, 
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer. 
 
Absent: 
 
Cllr. M. Farrell 
 
 
At the outset of the meeting on the proposal of the Mayor it was agreed to take Item 2 (b) with the 
presentation on Greenways. 
 
 
• Presentation on Dublin Galway Cycle Route 
 
Mr. B Dunne, acting Director of Service, introduced Mr. E. Ó Maidegáin of AECOM who stepped 
through a presentation, previously circulated, about the proposed Dublin to Galway Greenway 
cycle route. In response, Elected Members thanked Mr. Ó Maidegáin for his presentation and in 
general responded very positively to the development of cycle-ways and pointed to their success 
elsewhere. A number of issues were raised in discussion that followed including: access to land; 
compulsory purchase orders and permissive access; funding and development phases and 
timescales. Following responses from Mr. Ó Maidegáin, the Mayor thanked him for his attendance. 
 
2. (b) Local Government Act, 2001, Section 85 Agreements: 
 
 
(1) 
Barna Greenway – Section 85 Agreement with Galway County Council 
(2) 
Moycullen Greenway - Section 85 Agreement with Galway County Council 
 
As agreed, members considered the Section 85 Agreements regarding the proposed Greenways to 
Barna and to Moycullen at this point of the meeting. Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Service, 
outlined the proposed investigation of potential routes along both Greenways. 
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed, seconded by Cllr. P. Keane, the authorisation of the Section 85 
agreement with Galway County Council regarding the Barna Greenway. 

2 
Cllr. B. Cameron proposed, seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy, the authorisation of the Section 85 agreement 
with Galway County Council regarding the Moycullen Greenway.  
Both proposals were unanimously agreed. 
 
1. 
CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES 
 
(a) 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 23rd 
 
June 2014 (Harbour Amendment Bill). 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary Meeting held on 28th April were proposed by Cllr. McNelis, seconded 
by Cllr. Cameron and agreed. 
 
The Chief Executive outlined that since the meeting a grant has issued to engage a consultant to 
carry out due diligence in relation to the governance of Galway Harbour by Galway City Council. 
The terms of reference for the process are currently being finalised. 
 
(b)  
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 23rd 
 
June  2014 (Housing Function) 
 
 
The minutes of the Special Meeting held on 23rd June were proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe seconded by 
Cllr. Cameron and agreed. 
 
Matters of Accuracy: 
 
Councillors Connolly and Conneely suggested that the issue of the ongoing internal inquiry into 
certain matters in the Housing Department had been raised at the meeting but were not recorded. 
 
Matters Arising: 
 
Elected Members raised a range of issues in relation to Housing that had arisen in the course of the 
Special meeting. These included issues regarding turnaround of vacant houses; the Land 
Aggregation Scheme; RAS and the recruitment of new landlords; issues in Ballinfoile Park; the 
management of homeless services; liaison between City and County Council Housing Departments. 
The Chief Executive and Mr. Connell, the Director of Service for Housing, provided clarification on 
points raised. 
 
Cllr. O'Flaherty proposed, seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, the following motion: 
 
“I call on the City Council to enter into consultation with Galway County Council in relation to RAS 
and Long Term Leasing”. 
 
In favour:  
14 
Against: 
1 
Abstain: 
2.   
 
The motion was carried. 
 
Cllr. Keane proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, the following motion: 
 
“That Galway City Council resolves not to discharge the interest due on the loans which the 

3 
Department of the Environment & Local Government have refused to take back under the Land 
Aggregation Scheme until such time as there is a positive policy shift by Government to resolve this 
issue”. 
 
In favour:  
5 
Against: 
10 
Abstain: 
1.   
 
The motion was defeated. 
 
(c) 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 21st July, 
 
2014. 
  
The minutes of the Special Meeting held on 21st July were proposed by Cllr. McNelis seconded by 
Cllr. McDonnell and agreed. 
 
 
Matters Arising: 
Elected Members raised a range of issues in relation to matters arising at the meeting including 
Wolfe Tone Bridge; the soil in South Park; the City Bikes Scheme; Leisureland; Dog Fouling; the GAA 
and parking for events at Pearse Stadium. The Chief Executive and officials provided clarifications 
in relation to points raised. 
 
2.  
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE 
 
(a) 
Local Government Act, 2001, Section 183, Disposal of Land – Royal   
 
Tara Site, Mervue, Galway. 
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Service, referred to the report, previously circulated, regarding the 
proposed disposal of land at Mervue, the leases entered into with Royal Tara going back to the 
1950’s and the valuation of the land. In discussion that followed, elected members raised a range 
of issues regarding the proposed disposal; the valuation on the land; their obligations as members 
exercising a reserved function and the funding of the purchase of the airport site from the 
proceeds of the proposed disposal. 
 
In response, the Chief Executive and Mr. O’Neill clarified a number of issues and also undertook to 
revert with further information. 
Cllr McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. O’Flaherty, that the matter be deferred to the next 
meeting of the City Council and this was agreed. 
 
(b) 
Local Government Act, 2001, Section 85 Agreements: 
 
 
(3) 
Tuam Road/ N17 Bus Corridor - Section 85 Agreement with Galway County Council 
 
Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Service, outlined the proposed development of a bus lane along 
the N17 from the city to Claregalway as per the report previously circulated. In discussion, elected 
members raised a number of issues including current congestion along the road; the possibility of a 
car-pooling scheme; the need for service providers to increase the frequency of services and the 
need for an analysis of current use. Mr. Dunne provided clarifications. 
On the proposal of Cllr. Fahy, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, the Section 85 agreement with Galway 
County Council was authorised. 

4 
 
(c) 
Adoption of Draft Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Scheme 2014 – 2019  
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Service, referred to the report, previously circulated, regarding the draft 
SPC scheme. This included the proposal that each SPC would have 8 elected members and 4 
external members. 
On the proposal of Cllr. McDonnell, seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe, the SPC Scheme 2014 – 2019 was 
adopted unanimously. 
 
(d) 
Galway Salthill Fáilte Ltd  - Proposal for an additional board member 
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Service, referred to the report, previously circulated, regarding the 
expansion of the numbers of board members of Galway Salthill Fáilte Limited. 
Following a brief discussion, Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Conneely, that an 
additional member be added to the board of Galway Salthill Fáilte Limited. This was agreed. 
 
(e)  
“To hold a Special Meeting of Galway City Council on Wednesday 17th 
 
September to consider:  
 
 
(1) Consideration of Setting a Local Adjustment Factor for the Local Property Tax;  
 
(2) Consideration of varying the City Development Plan 
 
Cllr. Conneely proposed, seconded by Cllr. O’Flaherty, that a Special Meeting of Galway City Council 
be held on 17th September. This was agreed. 
 
(f)  
Local Government Act, 2001, Section 221, Adoption of Annual Reports  
 
Cllr. McNelis proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, that the Annual Reports for 2012 and 2013 be 
adopted. This was agreed. 
 
3.  
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS 
 
(a)  
Corporate Policy Group Meetings held on 26th August & 8th September 
 
The meetings and proceedings of the CPG held on 26th August and 8th September were noted. It 
was agreed that a meeting of the Procedures Committee should take place on Monday 22nd 
September. 
 
4. 
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS 
 
(a) 
UNESCO City of Film 
 
Mr. G. McMahon, acting Senior Executive Officer, stepped through a report, previously circulated, 
regarding the bid submitted to UNESCO to be designated a City of Film and to become a member 
of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network. He indicated that a delegation representing Galway Film 
Partnership including Galway City Council, Galway County Council and Galway Film Centre would 
progress the bid at the UNESCO Creative Cities Network Forum meeting to be held in Chengdu, 
China at the end of the month. 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
Acquisition of lands from Galway Corrib Airport Ltd.   
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Service, referred to the report, previously circulated, regarding the lands 
at Carnmore. He informed members that the aviation license to operate had been extended pro 
tem to the operators. 
 
 
(c)  
 Update on Gateway Initiative 
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Service, provided an update to members on the current status of 
recruitment to the Gateway jobs initiative: 20 participants are currently in place; 36 expected to be 
in place by the end of the month and a total of 55 participants in place by the end of the year. Cllr. 
Marley expressed her view that the initiative is ‘exploitative and unjust.’ 
 
 
(d) 
Quarterly Reports – Quarter Ending 30th June 2014 
 
 
 
(i) 
Transportation –  Deferred 
 
(ii) 
Environment, Recreation & Amenity – Deferred 
 
(iii) 
Housing – Deferred 
 
(iv) 
Community & Culture – Deferred 
 
(v) 
Finance Mid Year Report – Deferred 
 
 
Having reached 7.30pm, Members agreed to extend to 7.45pm and finish. 
 
 
(e) 
 Lough Atalia Road Lowering 
 
 
Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Service, provided an update to members on progress to date on 
the project. Site investigations were underway and the full design of the project will follow. The 
letter from Mr. P.A. Mannion to various members was noted and Mr. Dunne indicated that the 
suggestions contained therein had been considered.  
 
(f) 
Phase VI of the WHO Healthy Cities Programme (2014-2018). – Resolution 
 
that Galway City participates  
 
 
 
Clrr. McNelis proposed, seconded by Cllr. Larkin, “That Galway City Council supports the 
Participation of Galway City in Phase V of the World Health Organisation Healthy Cities 
Programme”. The motion was agreed unaninmously 
 
(g) 
 Irish Water 
 
 
 
Deferred 
 
(h) 
Christmas Market 2014   
 
 
Deferred 

6 
(i) 
Construction of 110kV Underground Cable from Knockranny 110kV 
 
Substation, Co. Galway, to the 110kV Ballybrit Substaton, Co. Galway (Cable) 
 
 
Deferred 
 
(j) 
Sports Capital Grant Allocations  
 
 
Deferred 
 
5. 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS: 
 
 
 
Deferred. 
 
6. 
QUESTIONS 
 
 
 
 
None. 
 
7. 
CORRESPONDENCE: 
 
 
The item of correspondence from the Association of Irish Local Government was noted, on the 
proposal of Cllr. McDonnell, seconded by Cllr Fahy. There were no further contributions or 
amendments to the item. 
 
8. 
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION 
 
 
 
 For Councillors information  
 
9. 
CONFERENCES 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Connolly, seconded by Cllr. Conneely and agreed. 
 
 
10.  VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
 
 
Votes of Congratulations 
 
 
Mr. Paddy McPhilbin on his success in the Tidy Towns and Gardens competition. 
 
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE 
 
MEETING 
 
 
None. 
 

7 
12. 
ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
 
The following two items were considered under Standing Order 22: 
On the proposal of the Mayor, seconded by Councillors Larkin, McNelis, Conneely, O'Flaherty, 
Walsh, Fahy, Cubbard, McDonnell, Flannery and Cameron, the following motion was agreed: 
 
 
“Galway City Council fully support and calls on Minister for Tourism to support Galway City Council 
as the host destination for Meitheal 2015.  It is an ideal way to promote tourism in the west and 
the Wild Atlantic Way at the 2015 Major Tour Operators Workshop”. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Flannery, seconded by Councillors McNelis, Cubbard, Walsh, Fahy, 
Cameron, Conneely, O'Flaherty, McDonnell, Lyons and Larkin, the following motion was put: 
 
“That Galway City Council lead by example in supporting animal welfare and agrees to ban all 
circuses using wild animals in any capacity for entertainment purposes in any area controlled by 
Galway City Council”. 
 
In favour: 
14. Against:  1. The motion was carried. 
 
The Meeting then concluded 
