Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in the Galmont Hotel,
Lough Atalia and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 8th November, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; M.J. Crowe; O. Hanley; E. Hoare;
D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor
Councillors: J. Connolly; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; C. Higgins;
P. Keane; D. Lyons; T. O'Flaherty
Councillor: I. Byrne & N. Larkin
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
P. Greene, Director of Services
P. Philbin, Director of Services
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
Ms.
D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
Mr. M. O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr. T. Prendergast, A/Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. J. Whelan, Executive Engineer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Ms. R. McNally, Meetings Administrator welcomed all and commenced with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment
of silent reflection.
Minutes, Cpnfirmed & S • ned
Mayor oj Galway
Ms. McNally proceeded to take Roll Call at the start of the meeting:
Roll Call at the start of the meeting
Present: Councillors: A. Cheevers; C. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; O. Hanley; E. Hoare; D. McDonnell;
N. McNelis; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
Present Virtually: Councillors: J. Connolly; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; D. Lyons & T. O'Flaherty
Absent at the start of the meeting: Councillors: M. Cubbard & P. Keane
Apologies: Cllr. l. Byrne & Cllr. N. Larkin
Cllr. M. Cubbard advised that there was a delay in gaining access to the meeting and requested that
item 4(h) Report & Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2021 be considered.
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting and further to the recommendation of the
Procedures Committee suggested that the meeting proceed until 6.30pm with a break at 4.50pm for
10 minutes to ventilate the room. This was proposed by Cllr. E. Hoare and seconded by Cllr. N.
Murphy and agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th October 2021 and adjournment meeting held
on 18th October 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising on the minutes individually for thc
two dates of the meeting:
11th October 2021
No matters of accuracy. Under matters arising Cllr. D. Lyons requested that NOM 39/2021 on the
agenda be considered, without debate when discussing 4(b) "Housing for All" — Policy Document.
This was noted.
18th October 2021
No matters of accuracy or matters arising.
Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th October 2021 and adjournment meeting held
on the 18th October 2021.
Minutes of 11th October: Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Minutes of 18th October: Proposed by: Cllr. N. Murphy Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly also referred Members to agenda item 2(a) Report from the Local Government
Auditor for 2020 on the Supplementary Agenda that issued.
21 Page
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group of Friday, 05th November 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group of Friday, 05th November 2021 was noted.
3(b) Report from Procedures Committee of 04th November 2021
Mayor C. Connolly referred to items for consideration by Council from the Procedures meeting:
That Council meetings commence at 3pm and finish at 6.30 and that a break be taken after two
hours to air/ventilate the meeting room.
That Council meetings will continue in a blended format to allow for both physical and online
participation.
That an adjournment meeting be held on Monday 15th November at 3pm, if the agenda items are
not dealt with by the end of the Council meeting scheduled for Monday 8th November.
That Council meetings going forward be held at the Galmont Hotel until February 2022.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3(b) Report from Procedures Committee of 04th November 2021 was noted.
Mayor C. Connolly advised that the matter was voted upon at the last meeting and she suggested
the consideration of 4(a)(i) Quarterly Report for Housing along with 4(b) Housing for All policy
document and 4(g) Chief Executive's Reports with matters relating to housing to be considered
together. This was agreed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Quarterly Report, July - September 2021
i. Housing
4(b) "Housing for All" — Policy Document
4(g) Chief Executive's Report:
October 2021
November 2021
Councillors discussed the reports in detail.
31 Page
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer, Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer and Mr. McGrath, Chief
Executive responded to the queries raised.
Cllr. J. Connolly requested the consideration of a Motion he submitted at the October Ordinary
meeting that "Galway City Council's Housing SPC review the scheme of letting priorities to assess if
flexibility can be applied to allow families currently only considered for a two-bed property to
express a preference for inclusion on the three-bedroom list".
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO advised that the Scheme of Letting Priorities must be in compliance with the
Housing Regulations, 2011.
Following discussion, the motion was ruled out of order.
Following a contribution from Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. A. Cheevers made a comment regarding 'left
leaning parties' giving false hope to people in the city. Mayor C. Connolly requested the withdrawal
of said comments. Cllr. A. Cheevers declined to withdraw same.
Mayor C. Connolly adjourned the meeting for ten minutes. The meeting resumed at 15.35pm
Councillors continued to discuss the Housing Reports.
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications raised.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to NOM 39/2021 and read same for consideration by Council.
Cllr. D. Lyons advised that the Motion was discussed at Strategic Policy Committee and that he was
happy for it to be considered by Council, without debate.
NOM 39/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 3rd October 2021
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Galway City Council requests the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to ask
for a relaxation of the restriction to one beds only for the Housing First Programme in order that
targets can be met.
The Motion was agreed and approved.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to a second motion for consideration by Council.
Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
Galway City Council call on the Minister for Finance to extend the Help to Buy Incentive Scheme for
at least five more years after he has carried out his review in 2022.
That this Motion be circulated to all local authorities.
The Motion was agreed and approved.
41
Page
Mayor C. Connolly referred to a Motion submitted by Cllr. D. McDonnell for consideration by
Council. Cllr. D. McDonnell spoke on the Motion.
Motion submitted at the meeting
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Galway City Council call on Minister Darragh O'Brien to ensure that all lending institutions will
play their part to supply finance to applicants under the new Affordable Housing Scheme and
the current Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme, given that there has been no uptake in the
past due to the clawback. For this scheme to work to its full potential will require all lending
institutions playing their part to alleviate the current housing crisis and not use the equity as a
reason for refusal of mortgage applications
The Motion was agreed and approved.
At 4.50pm, Mayor Connolly adjourned the meeting for ten minutes to ventilate the room. The
meeting resumed at 5.05pm.
Mayor C. Connolly suggested the consideration of 4(a)(ii) & (iii) Quarterly Report and 4(g) Chief
Executive's Reports with matters relating to same. This was agreed.
4(a) Quarterly Report, July - September 2021
Environment & Climate Change
ii.
Recreation & Amenity
4(g) Chief Executive's Report pertaining to Environment & Climate Change & Recreation & Amenity.
October 2021
November 2021
Councillors discussed the Reports.
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO; Ms. C. Kilcoyne, SE; Mr. P. Greene, DoS and the Chief Executive responded to
queries and clarifications raised.
Cllr. J. Connolly requested that NOM 24/2021 be considered. Cllr. T. O'Flaherty initially seconded the
motion but then withdrew her seconding of same subsequently. Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
advised that he would examine the Motion submitted.
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Seconded: Cllr. E. Hoare
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing water
quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
51 Page
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed the noting and approval of Agenda Item 7, 9 & 10 on the Agenda. This was
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence were noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
(a) Correspondence dated 10th September 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 15th September 2021 received from Clare County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 16th September 2021 received from Meath County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 20th September 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
(e) Correspondence dated 1st October 2021 received from Rita Ann Higgins
(f) Correspondence dated 1st October 2021 to Mayor Colette Connolly from F6rsa / Siptu /
Connect Trade Union
(g) Correspondence dated 14th October 2021 received from South Dublin County Council
(h) Correspondence dated 19th October 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(i) E-mail dated 28th October 2021 from Charles Spillane, NUIG to Mayor Colette Connolly
re Global Mayors Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy
(j) Draft River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2022 — 2027
9. CONFERENCES
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell.
hat approved training and conferences be approved. This was agreed.
Approved Training:
(a) Title: AILG Module 2— Elected Members Mental Health & Well-Being and Briefing on the National
Office for Suicide Prevention
RETROSPECTIVE
Venue: Clayton Hotel, Galway / Avalon House Hotel, Castlecomer, Co. Kilkenny
Date: 6th November / 10th November 2021
(b) Title: Irish Planning Institute — Annual Conference 2021
Venue: Clayton Whites Hotel, Wexford
Date: 17th -19th November 2021
Cllr. D. McDonnell was approved to attend.
Conferences:
(c) Title: Celtic Conferences — Mental Health & Wellbeing
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Date: 3rd, 4th & 5th December 2021
6 | Page
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations were approved.
Mayor C. Connolly requested a motion be considered. A Roll Call Vote was taken on same.
Mayor C. Cubbard referred to a Motion that she wished to be considered. Following discussion, this
was agreed.
Ms. R. McNally proceed to take a roll call vote on same:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
That GCC looks at the provision of a dog park in the City.
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley;
Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 10 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 12
The motion was passed
The meeting concluded at 6.30pm.
71 Page
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in the Galmont Hotel,
Lough Atalia and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 15th November, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M. Cubbard;
O. Hanley; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
Councillors: I. Byrne; M.J. Crowe; F. Fahy; E. Hoare; N. Larkin;
D. Lyons; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis & T. O'Flaherty
Councillor: C. Higgins
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
P. Philbin, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
P. Greene, Director of Services
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. M. O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. J. Whelan, Executive Engineer
Mr. G. McMahon, Arts Officer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting. She proposed that agenda item 2(a) Report from
the Local Government Auditor for 2020 be considered first; followed by agenda item 4(h) Report
and Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2021. She also referred to a motion for the purpose of
dealing with urgent business submitted by Cllr. A. Cheevers and two items of correspondence 7(i)
E-mail dated 28th October 2021 from Charles Spillane, NIJIG to Mayor Colette Connolly re: Global
Mayors Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy and an e-mail request from Mr. Ciaran Tierney
regarding flying the flag of Palestine on 29th November at City Hall. This proposed consideration of
the agenda was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and agreed.
81 Page
Mayor Connolly thanked Mr. Gary McMahon, former Meetings Administrator and wished him well
in his new role.
Ms. R. McNally proceeded to take Roll Call at the start of the meeting:
Roll Call at the start of the meeting
Present: Councillors: A. Cheevers; C. Connolly; J. Connolly; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; P. Keane;
N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
Present Virtually: Councillors: l. Byrne; M.J. Crowe; F. Fahy; E. Hoare; N. Larkin; D. Lyons &
T. O'Flaherty
Absent at the start of the meeting: Councillors: D. McDonnell & N. McNelis
Apologies: Cllr. C. Higgins
Cllr. D. Lyons cited difficulties accessing the meeting online. It was agreed that Councillors be given
access to Council meetings at least ten minutes in advance of the commencement of the meeting.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Report from the Local Government Auditor for 2020
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to the positive Local Government Auditor Report for 2020
and congratulated the Finance team and all involved.
Councillors discussed the Report and raised queries and clarifications including a request for an
update on green public procurement; rates collection to date for 2021; remaining assets for transfer
to Irish Water; outstanding land loans; development levies collection rates and a request for the
number of judgement orders on derelict sites.
Mayor C. Connolly suggested that the Council write to the Department of Justice regarding concerns
over the Lough Corrib Navigation Trustees legal status.
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer and Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer responded to queries
raised.
The Chief Executive referred to the legal lacuna regarding the enabling legislative basis for the
functions and activities of the Lough Corrib Navigation Trustees and advised that he is hopeful that
the matter will be resolved in upcoming legislation.
He added that a national working group is examining unsold affordable housing.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O'Connor Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To note 2(a) Report from the Local Government Auditor for 2020 - circulated 5th November 2021.
The Report was noted by Council.
9 IP age
Mayor. C. Connolly suggested the taking of a motion submitted by Cllr. A. Cheevers.
Motion submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Supported By: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. M. Cubbard;
Cllr. M. O' Connor; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. C. Higgins & Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. P. Keane
Calling on Galway City Council recreation and amenities department to host town hall meetings
with sports clubs and community groups by zoom in relation to the Galway City Council review
of recreation and amenity facilities across the city.
Cllr. A. Cheevers spoke on the motion.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that following an updating of tender documents to procure a
Consultant, to develop a Green Space Strategy which will include a public consultation process.
Following this advice; Cllr. A. Cheevers accepted this commitment and withdrew the motion.
Councillors raised concerns regarding delays to planned upgrades of tennis courts in the city and
queried if there were any penalty clauses in the contract as a result of the delays.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
I propose that immediate contact be made with the successful contractor regarding the tennis court
upgrades and firm timeframes sought to have this work done, with the information subsequently
circulated to Councillors.
This was agreed.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that the Executive will make further contact with the
contractor and give an update to Councillors on same.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to correspondence 7(i) and proposed the following:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
That correspondence item 7(i) Email dated 28th October, 2021 from Mr Charles Spillane, NUIG to
Mayor C. Connolly regarding Global Mayors Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy be put on
the December Council meeting agenda as a specific item.
This was agreed.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to an e-mail sent to all Councillors from Mr. Ciaran Tierney regarding a
request to the City Council to fly the flag of Palestine to mark the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People on Monday, 29th November, 2021. Councillors discussed same.
101 Page
It was advised that a draft Protocol for the flying of flags from Civic Buildings had come before the
Procedures committee in September 2019. However, this was not agreed by the Procedures
Committee or brought to full Council for consideration.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
That the flag of Palestine be flown outside City Hall on 29th November, 2021.
This was agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That the draft Protocol for the flying of flags from Civic Buildings come before Council for
discussion and consideration.
This was agreed.
Mayor. C. Connolly proposed an adjournment of the meeting at 16:50. This was agreed. The meeting
resumed at 17:03.
4(h) Report and Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2021
Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer and Mr. B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer gave a short
presentation on the Report circulated to Councillors.
Councillors discussed the Report and some raised concerns regarding the proposed spending of
monies from the reserve fund.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the Marketing Report and Recommendations be adopted. This was
seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Cllr. P. Keane submitted an amendment to the motion. In line with Standing Orders Ms. R. McNally
proceeded to take a roll call vote on the amendment motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
That the allocations as set out in the Marketing Fund Report presented to Councillors stand
approved save for the proposal to allocate funds from the Sinking Fund which should not be
approved - per Report circulated 15th October in the amount of €75,000.
(Note: Proposed funding to Gradam Ceoil €50,000 & Festival of Light €75,000 is not approved).
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M. J. Crowe; Cllr. O. Hanley;
Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor.
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. D. Lyons & Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty
In Favour: 9 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 15
The amendment was passed.
11 IP age
In line with Standing Orders when the amendment is passed it becomes the substantive motion. Ms.
R. McNally proceeded to take a roll call vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
That the allocations as set out in the Marketing Fund Report presented to Councillors stand
approved save for the proposal to allocate funds from the Sinking Fund which should not Be
approved — per Report circulated 15th October in the amount of €75,000.
(Note: Proposed funding to Gradam Ceoil €50,000 & Festival of Light €75,000 is not approved).
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M. J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin;
Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The motion was assed.
Councillors discussed the assessment and recommendation process for the Marketing Fund.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
I propose that both the Mayor and Chairperson of the Economic, Community and Cultural
Development Strategic Policy Committee would sit on the Committee that deliberate applications
to the Marketing Fund, before it reverts to the Corporate Policy Group.
This was agreed.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to due diligence, governance and the role of the executive
advising that he had wished to advise the Council in relation to the matter and that he had indicated
his wish to do so.
Mayor. C. Connolly reiterated that the Council wished to have input into the process and requested
that the Chief Executive come back and facilitate the intent of the Council.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed a number of dates and times for the draft City Development Plan 2023
- 2029 workshops to be held at the Galmont Hotel. The following dates and times were seconded by
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and agreed; subject to the caveat of the introduction of new restrictions which
may affect same.
Thursday 2nd December 2021
Friday 3rd December 2021
Tuesday 7th December 2021
Wednesday 8th December 2021
Burren Suite - Workshop 1 - 2pm — 5pm
Veranda Lounge - Workshop 2 - 10am — lpm
Veranda Lounge - Worksho 3 - 10am — lpm
Veranda Lounge - Workshop 4 - 2pm — 5pm
12 | Page
Cllr. C. Connolly raised the issue of attendance at meetings by Councillors; either physically or online.
Following discussion, Cllr. C. Connolly proposed the following:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Where a Councillor temporarily or permanently leaves a meeting; either physically or online
they must e-mail or phone the Meetings Administration team to advise of same for purposes of
clarification when it comes to taking a vote or roll call.
In line with Standing Orders, the Mayor may suspend the taking of a vote for up to 15 minutes
should a member lose on-line connectivity in the course of taking of a vote or roll call; and
where they have not formally contacted the Meetings Administration team to advise that they
have left the meeting.
Contact details:
Geraldine.Reilly@galwaycity.ie 087 0614081
Ailish.Rohan@galwavcitv.ie 087 6134388
This was agreed and approved.
4(a) Quarterly Report, July - September 2021 — Not Considered.
iv.
V.
vi.
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
Transport & Infrastructure
4(c) Galway City Council Digital Strategy - Not Considered.
4(d) Urban Regeneration Development Fund (URDF) - Not Considered.
4(e) Schools' Street Pilot Recommendations - Not Considered.
4(f) National Development Plan 2021 - 2030 - Not Considered.
4(i) Update on Proposed Temporary Cycle Lane in Salthill - Not Considered.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary excavation
works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan, Thomas Caffrey and Tim
Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these
five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
13 Page
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment that
international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national corporations to sue
Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should be fully and properly scrutinised
by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered.
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with 'Davy'
forthwith
Not Considered.
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to councillors and
staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings in administration,
printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental section of Galway City
Council.
Not Considered.
NOM 18/2021 also submitted under S034 at Council meeting held on 12th April 2021.
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also made
possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media
Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water Sports Centre
at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works together with a planned
timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently being
progressed.
14 | Page
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art facilities for
outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage. This was
to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its own merit for safety
particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered.
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and in public
procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission from a supplier
when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to invoke a
similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal quarrying,
or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021 - Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
• Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily off the road
due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of their condition.
• Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not Considered.
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic Act
2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-keeping with a
cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall be presented as
standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
Reply issued 9th November 2021. Request by Cllr. O. Hanley to leave on the Agenda.
15 | Page
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the use of
automated signage.
Not Considered.
NOM 33/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 22nd June 2021
Galway City Council acknowledges the need for a new national maternity hospital (NMH) to provide
the highest quality healthcare in Dublin, and across Ireland.
Galway City Council notes the lack of legal clarity regarding the ownership and management of the
hospital, and also acknowledges the concerns regarding the employment rights of those who will
work in the hospital.
Galway City Council agrees to write to the Minister for Health to call for the proposed new publicly-
funded NMH to be constructed on land owned by the State; and that, to guarantee its secular ethos,
the new facility be fully owned and governed by the State. If this motion is passed it is agreed that
this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
NOM 35/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 5th July 2021
That this Council again calls on the NTA to provide a bus route for Upr. Ballymoneen Road and engage
with operators to deliver same. With two new developments built by City Council and a third to seek
planning and also a new school, it is important that public transport be made available for residents.
It is not appropriate to expect residents to walk to Western Distributor Road as this does not
promote use of public transport. A copy of this motion to be sent to Minister for Transport.
Not Considered.
NOM 40/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 4th October 2021
I propose that Galway City Council supports this motion which is calling on Government to deliver a
New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022.
The pandemic has shown us just how crucial Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) is for
parents, children and the economy. However, the sector is in crisis. Low levels of government
investment and a broken funding system have resulted in poverty pay for professionals, high fees for
parents and high staff turnover as services struggle to recruit and retain workers. This approach is
undermining quality for children.
Irish Government investment in the Early Years Sector lags far behind other European
Countries.
Irish parents pay the highest fees in Europe the average weekly fee for full-time childcare is
€186.
The average hourl a for Earl Years Educators is €11.91.
16 | Page
• The average staff turnover is 40% in full day services per year.
In Budget 2022, the Government can start the transformation of ECEC by increasing investment and
implementing a new funding model so educators are paid a decent wage, childcare is affordable for
parents and these essential services are sustainable into the future.
I call on Galway City Council to support a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022, and in doing so I
propose that a letter is sent on behalf of Galway City Council to both Minister O'Gorman and Minister
McGrath asking them both to support a new deal for Early Years by increasing Government
investment in Budget 2022 in order to deliver quality care and education for our children, our
workers, parents and providers.
Not Considered.
NOM 41/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 2nd October 2021
The Irish Society for Colitis & Crohn's Disease is a patient-to-patient support group for over 40,000
people who are living with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) in Ireland. Inflammatory Bowel
Disease describes a group of conditions in which the intestines become inflamed. The two most
common inflammatory bowel diseases are Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
Living with IBD can be a daily struggle, traveling outside the home has always been a challenge for
many people living with IBD.
The Irish Society for Colitis and Crohn's Disease is calling on all County Councils and the
Department of Health to recognise our "No Waiting" card, to support people in the community
with IBD gaining urgent access to a nearby toilet.
Not Considered.
NOM 42/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 11th October 2021
That Galway City Council agree to explore the possibility of creating a garden dedicated to the
memory of children lost during pregnancy. This garden would give parents and families a space to
grieve, acknowledge and remember.
Reply issued 9th November 2021.
NOM 43/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 28th October 2021
That Galway City Council will ensure that apprenticeships are facilitated in any public infrastructure
project that Galway City Council is leading and/or collaborating with another agency such as the
Land Development Agency to deliver. This policy will be in-line with the Council's Strategic
Workforce Planning Framework, relevant EU directives as well as procurement and tendering
regulations to achieve social dividends.
Not Considered.
171 Page
6. QUESTIONS
Question 21/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 26th September 2021
Following the publication of the Night-Time Economy Taskforce recommendations will the Council
make provision for a Night-Time Economy Advisor in Draft Budget 2022 as well progressing a Night-
Time Economy committee? And is there scope to carry forward or prevail of any potential
underspend in festival funding this year arising from public health restrictions, such as the 70,000
allocated to St. Patricks' Day 2021, to plan and fund an expanded St. Patricks' Day 2022 with
additional night-time activities or otherwise offer support to the night-time economy in 2022
Not Considered.
Question 24/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 16th October 2021
Could the Council receive an update on the progression of the South Park Masterplan? Have the
Council explored potential funding sources for the project? Is it intended to progress the project on
a phased basis? Does the Project require any element of planning consent?
Reply issued 9th November, 2021.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION - None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING - None
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The Meeting ended at 18.29pm
18 | Page