DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
held on Monday 9th March, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at the Galmont hotel, Lough Atalia Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, M. 0' Connor, T. 0' Flaherty and P. 0' Reilly.
Apologies: Cllr. O. Crowe
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
Ms.
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Mr.
Mr. C. Kelly, Administrative Officer
Ms. E. Murphy, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. A. Bhreathnach, Oifigeach Gaeilge
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection. Following a Covid-19 risk
assessment of the Council chamber in regards to current Covid-19 coronavirus guidance &
consultation with the Mayor, Mr. G. McMahon advised that the monthly meeting was moved to the
Galmont Hotel.
Mayor Cubbard suggested the following order of consideration of the Agenda: Item I(a), 2(a), 4(a)
and then revert to 2(b) and follow the sequential order of the Agenda. This was agreed.
& Signed
Mayor of Galway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 10th February 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Motion to Adopt Item 1 (a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 10th
February 2020.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Cllr. C. Connolly advised that as part of the discussion at the February Council meeting, it was agreed that
information would be provided regarding a right of way on Merchant's Road. The Chief Executive
confirmed that a response will issue regarding this matter.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Filling of Vacancy on a Committee or Approved Body - Northern and Western Regional Assembly
- following the resignation of Cllr. Declan McDonnell
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O' Reilly Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Motion to nominate Cllr. N. McNelis to the Northern and Western Regional Assembly (NWRA) -
following the resignation of Cllr. D. McDonnell.
This Motion was agreed.
Cllr. D. McDonnell informed the meeting that he was nominated in December 2019 as a member of
the NWRA by the European Committee of the Regions and now sits on the assembly.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Foras na Gaeilge — Presentation/Cur i låthair ag Seén Ö Coinn
Mr. S. Ö Coinn, Foras na Gaeilge gave a detailed presentation outlining the background and language
planning policies of Foras na Gaeilge - An Pråiseas Pleanåla Teanga. He informed Members about the
Belfast agreement, funding, Foras na Gaeilge's 20 year Strategy and 7 year Plan, language planning
and the promotion of Gaeilge. He highlighted the importance of Galway City with its bilingual status
and as a Gaeltacht Service Town. He outlined good practices in Councils, the role of the Oifigeach
Gaeilge/lrish Officer and various supports available.
Mayor Cubbard thanked Uas. Ö Coinn for his presentation during Seachtain na Gaeilge.
2
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(b) Galway Harbour Company - Due Diligence in context of National Ports Policy and the Harbours
Act, 2015
A number of Councillors referred to a workshop held on Wednesday 4th March in City Hall where a
presentation was made by Mr. Conor O' Dowd, Chief Executive of the Port of Galway and Mr. Maurice
O' Gorman, Chairperson of Galway Harbour Company. A number of Councillors expressed their
disappointment of notification that the consulting firm Smith and Williamson Limited who were hired
to assess the port company could not attend the workshop.
The Chief Executive advised that the consultants that initially had been procured to carry out the
assessment had been taken over by Smith and Williamson Limited. The Chief Executive will extend an
invitation to them again to present to Councillors.
The Chief Executive gave background to Councillors regarding the two options available under the
Harbours Act 2015:
1. Transfer of shareholding of the Port Company to Galway City Council or
2. Dissolve the Port Company entirely and Galway City Council take over its functions and operation.
Councillors discussed options including the deferral of the matter.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Galway City Council agrees to postpone a decision on Galway Port until an independent review is
conducted outlining the impact on other ports taken over by Councils such as Arklow, Wicklow and
Dun Laoghaire.
In Favour: 7 Against: 10 Abstain: O Present: 17
This Motion was defeated.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
That the Chief Executive of Galway City Council would communicate to the Minister that the
shareholding of the Galway Harbour Company Limited not transfer to Galway City Council until a
decision is forthcoming from An Bord Pleanåla with regard to the current planning application
before it or until June 2021 whichever date is sooner.
In Favour: 7 Against: IO Abstain: O Present: 17
This Motion was defeated.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
' 'That Galway City Council adopt a transfer of shareholding as outlined in the Chief Executive Report
of 9th December 2019. This option can be reconsidered in three years following transition or as
rescribed in the legislation".
3
Cllr. C. Higgins proposed an amendment to Cllr. D. McDonnell's Motion as follows:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Galway City Council postpones a decision until the Councillors hear from Consultants of original
report.
In Favour: 10 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Amendment was approved.
As the amendment was approved, it becomes the substantive Motion in line with Standing Orders.
A Vote was taken on the Motion as follows:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Galway City Council postpones a decision until the Councillors hear from Consultants of original
report.
In Favour: 10 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was approved.
2(c) St. Patrick's Day Parade Event Licence
Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. referred Members to consider the Event Licence for Galway St. Patrick's Day
parade under the current circumstances of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak.
Cllr. C. Connolly submitted a Motion in writing "that Galway City Council does not proceed with St.
Patrick's Day Parade in the interest of public health and safety and due to the outbreak of the
Coronavirus". This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard. This Motion was subsequently withdrawn at a
later stage of the meeting.
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner outlined the contents of the event licence application.
Councillors discussed the matter including health & safety, insurance and protocols for events.
Cllr. P. O' Reilly submitted a Motion in writing "that the St. Patrick's Day parade in Galway city be
cancelled on health and safety grounds. This motion was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that we defer making a decision on the proposed granting of a licence to hold a parade
on St. Patrick's Day prior to 7.30 p.m. today so that we may have information from Government
on the staging of St. Patrick's Day parades nationally.
In Favour: 10 Against: 7 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was agreed.
4
At 16:55, Mayor Cubbard proposed a 15 minutes break. This was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare and
agreed. The Meeting resumed at 17:15.
2(d) S.183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Disposal of Lands at Letteragh, Galway to Respond
Housing Association
Mr. D. Mahon referred to the report issued to members in advance of the Council meeting and
Councillors discussed the Section 183 Notice in respect of the proposed disposal of land in the
ownership of Galway City Council at Letteragh, Galway. Matters raised included requirement for
enhanced pedestrian facilities on Circular road, Notice of Motion No. 03/2020 regarding bus route
404, local infrastructure, housing mix and make up, planning contributions, levies and planning
conditions attached to the proposed development.
Mr. D. Mahon answered queries in detail and advised that the proposed sale of land to Respond
includes planning permission for a total of 83 residential units and that planning conditions under
planning reference 18/199 apply. He advised that Respond have agreed the turnkey acquisition of the
entire development, subject to funding under the Capital Advance Leasing Facility from the
Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government. As part of the acquisition, Respond propose to
purchase all 83 units in the development including that part of the site which is in the ownership of
the developer. The disposal proposed under this Section 183 Notice provides for Respond to acquire
the remaining part of the overall site which is in the ownership of Galway City Council. Mr. Mahon
referred to the maps circulated indicating the location of the lands in Council ownership, the balance
of lands included under planning reference 18/99 and an overall site layout of the proposed
development. Mr. Mahon recommended to the Members the disposal of the area of land outlined on
the map in red to Respond Housing Association for the sum of €185,000. He confirmed that this value
is supported by an independent market valuation.
Cllr. C. Connolly submitted a Motion in writing "l propose that Section 183 be contingent on receipt of
"Planning Contribution Fees" as laid out in Condition 22". This was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare. This
Motion was subsequently withdrawn at a later stage of the meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
That Galway City Council set aside a sum of money from the sale of land in Letteragh to Respond
to facilitate the upgrade of the road surface and footpaths on Circular Road to enable children from
the new development and adjoining areas to walk and cycle to Bushypark National school and other
educational facilities locally
In Favour: 7 Against: 8 Abstain: 1
Present: 16
The Motion was defeated.
5
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed a Motion as follows:
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To approve Notice pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, and Section 211 of
the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 in respect of the disposal of 0.44ha of
land at Letteragh, Galway to Respond Housing Association for the sum of €185,000 — per Notice
distributed.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was approved.
2(e) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of properties by
Approved Housing Bodies - Galway Simon
Mr. D. Mahon informed the meeting regarding five no. approved housing body CAS acquisitions by
Galway SIMON Community for the provision of housing of homeless accommodation for a number of
different projects. He advised that all five properties are supported by an independent valuation and
are being acquired within Galway City Council's delegated sanction for these unit types.
Councillors discussed the proposal.
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To approve the raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of
properties by Approved Housing Bodies - Galway Simon per Report dated 3rd March 2020:
22 An Cimin Mör, Cappagh Road - purchase price €185,000
29 Gleann na Trå, Sandy Road - purchase price €180,000
73 Rian Luachra, Ballybane - purchase price €180,000
75 Cill Ard, Bohermore - purchase price €185,000
204 Tür Uisce, Doughiska - purchase price €165,000
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: 0 Present: 14
This Motion was agreed.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that Items 2(f) and 4(d) be taken together. This was agreed.
2(f) Galway City Local Community Development Committee Annual Report 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To note the Galway City Local Community Development Committee Annual Report 2019
The Report was noted.
6
4 (d) Local Economic Community Plan - Implementation Plan 2020-2021
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
To note the Local Economic Community Plan - Implementation Plan 2020-2021
The Plan was noted.
2(c) St. Patrick's Day Parade Event Licence
At 17.13, Mayor Cubbard advised the Department of Health had issued notice that all St. Patrick's Day
Parades nationally were cancelled due to the Covid-19 coronavirus outbreak.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To grant the Event Licence application for the St. Patrick's day parade in the knowledge that the
parade is not going ahead.
In Favour: 11 Against: 3 Abstain: O Present: 14
This Motion was agreed.
2(g) Draft Corporate Plan 2019 - 2024
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
To adopt the Corporate Plan 2019-2024
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
This Motion was agreed.
2(h) To Fix Date for the April Ordinary Council Meeting
Proposed by: Mayor Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Mayor Cubbard proposed that the April Ordinary Council Meeting be held on Monday 6th April 2020
as the original scheduled date of Monday 13th April 2020 is Bank Holiday Easter Monday.
This Motion was agreed.
Cllr. O Hanley referred to a request he made for a Special meeting to consider Notices of Motions
which was seconded by Cllr. M. O' Connor. Councillors discussed various options regarding meeting
start times and items to consider.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that the April Ordinary Council Meeting to be held on Monday 6th April
2020 commence at IO a.m. and that the Meeting Agenda and end time be reviewed at 12 p.m.
This Motion was agreed.
7
2(i) Audit Committee
(i) Review and Adoption of Audit Committee Charter
(ii) Adoption of Audit Committee Work Programme for 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To (i) Review and Adopt the Audit Committee Charter
(ii) Adopt the Audit Committee Work Programme for 2020
This Motion was agreed and adopted.
3(a) Corporate Policy Group Meeting draft minutes 26th Feb 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To adopt the minutes of the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 26th February 2020.
This Motion was agreed.
Councillors referred to Strategic Policy Committee training held on the morning of Monday 9th March
and an item raised regarding Beneficial Interests under the Local Government Act, 2001 and potential
conflict of interest for Councillors sitting on various boards. Other matters raised included an update
on Notices of Motions passed and the calendar of meetings.
The Chief Executive confirmed that advice is being sought on the matter of any conflict of interest. It
was agreed that Beneficial Interests will be considered at the start of the next Procedure's meeting.
The Meetings Administrator advised that details of Notices of Motions are recorded on an excel sheet
and this will be made available on the extranet for Councillors' information. He noted Councillors
comments in relation to timetabling of meetings.
Mayor Cubbard paid tribute to An Garda Sfochåna and to Galway City Council, in particular, Mr. G.
McMahon, on the recent trip of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to Galway City. Mayor Cubbard
also informed the Meeting that he will not be travelling to Seattle and New York representing the City
Council in St. Patrick's Day festivities.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(b) Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Feasibility (LSSIF) at Cappagh Park
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To defer Item 4(b) until the April Ordinary Council meeting as first Item under Consideration of
Reports of Officials.
This Motion was agreed.
8
4 (c) Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF) - Call for Proposals
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund Call for
Proposals announced as part of Project Ireland, 2040, to support the compact growth and sustainable
development of Ireland's five cities and other large urban centres. The Circular was issued on 13th
January 2020 and the Chief Executive confirmed the closing date of 31st March 2020 for applications.
At 18:45 p.m. Mayor Cubbard rose and Deputy Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair.
Mr. B. McGrath advised that the URDF has an allocation of €2 billion up to 2027. He further advised
that applications for funding must be made by the relevant Local Authority, who, in turn, will prioritise
three proposals ranked in order of importance and by reference to the Regional Spatial and Economic
Strategy and the Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan. He added that collaborations with other public
bodies and with the private sector is encouraged. He outlined a number of potential projects that staff
in Galway City Council were examining. He added that schemes should support wider climate action
objectives and liveability factors within our City and that the matched funding requirement is at a
minimum of 25%.
Councillors discussed the URDF Call for proposals and potential projects and it was requested that a
brief summary of each proposal be distributed to them.
4 (e) To consider a submission to Sustainable Mobility policy review by Department of Transport,
Tourism and Sport - Not Considered
4 (f) Draft Tourism Strategy 2020 - Not Considered
4( g) Chief Executive's Report
February 2020 - Not Considered
ii. March 2020 - Not Considered
9
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 18/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty, D.
Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and
Biodiversity emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
• Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
• Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
• Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
• Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
• Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every
Council meeting
• Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives
of civil society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include
prioritising transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable
approach to the Climate Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. Motion to remain on the Agenda.
NOM 19/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing,
Planning, Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election
posters as follows:
• Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
• Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local
Authority Area for the display of authorised election material
• That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable
policy proposals by all candidates running for election
• That all election candidates be given equal space for display
• That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as
laid down by law
Not Considered
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund
scheme specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
Not Considered
10
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately:
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence
Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force
personnel.
Not Considered
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that
her Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees
access their personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the
equality and personal autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
Not Considered
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020
marking the centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred
in Galway during 1920 including but not exclusive to:
• The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus
Quirke in September 1920.
• The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
• The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
• The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
• The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces. "
Not Considered
NOM 43/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and
the Minister of State for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special
responsibility for Equality, Immigration and Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the
closure of all Galway based Direct Provision Centres and instead, offer residents suitable,
community-based accommodation and services for children and families.
Not Considered
11
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries
warning about the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary
exposure to electromagnetic radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect
the environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on Comm Reg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a
working group to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and
human health due to the current questionable scientific knowledge."
Not Considered
NOM 54/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th October 2019
This local authority write to Paschal Donohoe T.D, Minister for Finance, Public Expenditure
and Reform stating that "Eurostat has confirmed that the Northern and Western Region,
which includes our local authority, has moved back from a 'Developed Region' to 'Region
in Transition and considering that this points to a two speed national economy, how is the
Minister proposing to address it; is there opportunity for positive discrimination? Can the
Minister also confirm that European Regional Development Funding will continue to be
delivered in the regions post 2020?
Not Considered
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals
etc. and all workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
Not Considered
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
Not Considered
NOM 69/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th December 2019
Galway City Council calls to expand the remit of IPB Insurance to provide public liability
insurance, at an affordable rate, to communi events and festivals that are otherwise
12
unable to source affordable insurance. We also call on other local authorities, Regional
Assemblies and ETBs to also ask for this motion to be supported.
Not Considered
NOM 03/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 13th January 2020
That Galway City Council engage and consult with the National Transport Authority with a
view to amending the existing 404 route from Westside to Oranmore. The proposed
amendments to the existing route have been forwarded to Galway City Council for
consideration.
Response issued with Agenda 4th March 2020.
NOM 0412020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
Date Received: 14th January 2020
I request as a matter of urgency that street lighting be installed along by the plots, behind
the Waterside, west of the Dyke Road. Galway City Council operate a paid parking system
in that space but no lighting is provided. During a town hall show patrons had their tax and
insurance discs stolen from their car which had been parked in this area in daylight, on
return they report the area was in complete darkness.
Not Considered
NOM 05/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 27th January 2020
That Galway City Council call on the Minister with responsibilities for local government to
hold a plebiscite vote on a proposal for a directly elected Mayor with executive functions.
Not Considered
NOM 06/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 27th February 2020
That Galway City Council contacts the Board of NUI Galway requesting them to reverse the
recent decision to impose a 4% increase in on-campus accommodation for the academic
year 20/21. This sets out the wrong message and directly contradicts the NUI Strategic Plan
20-25 which prioritises the provision of affordable and sustainable on campus
accommodation for its students.
Not Considered
13
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/2020
Question given by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Date Received: 13th January 2020
Following a commitment given at a meeting I organised with Deputy Noel Grealish on July
24, 2014 — attended by Mr. Ray O' Dwyer, Head of Operations for Irish Water; Mr. Tim O'
Connor, Irish Water; Galway City Council Chief Executive Mr. Brendan McGrath; former
Head of Finance Ms. Edel McCormack; and former Senior Engineer Mr. Ray Brennan - that
the bathing water in Ballyloughane would be prioritised, and that remedial works would
be carried out to bring the water up to an acceptable standard, I am now requesting a full
report on the issue. I request a detailed report on all remedial works carried out by Irish
Water and Galway City Council, and also the costs involved in carrying out these works. I
am also seeking details of any further remedial works that may be necessary, and a
commitment that any such works will be carried out as a matter of urgency.
Not Considered
7. CORRESPONDENCE
The noting of Item 7. Correspondence was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly
and agreed.
(a) Correspondence from Kerry County Council dated 5th February 2020
(b) Correspondence from Department of Health dated 2nd March 2020
(c) Advisory note from the Health Service Executive regarding COVID-IO
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None
9. CONFERENCES
None.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS
Item 10 — Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by
Cllr. C. Connolly and agreed as follows:
Sympathies
• Teresa Mitchell, R.I.P.
Mary Stakem, R.I.P.
• Margaret Kelly, R.I.P.
14
Congratulations
• Mr. Norbert Métairie
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 7 p.m.
15
