Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 9th September, 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, Colette Connolly, John Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O.
Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty and P. O'Reilly.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms.
R. McNally, Director of Services
. D. Mahon, Director of Services
Mr
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
P. Batty, Executive Engineer
D. Healy, Staff Officer
Mr.
Ms.
C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
None
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.02pm by welcoming Members, and advising Members of his
intention to take the Agenda as set.
The Mayor proposed a Special Meeting be held on the 23rd of September, at 3.00pm, to take Item 4 (l)
Quarterly Reports, and Item 5 — Notices of Motion, if not dealt with in this meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to hold a Special Meeting on the 23rd of September, at 3.00pm, to take Item 4 (I) Quarterly
Reports, and Item 5 — Notices of Motion, if not dealt with at the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City
Council on Monday 9th September, 2019.
The Motion was agreed.
Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th July 2019
The Mayor invited matters of accuracy and Matters Arising.
Cllr. Colette Connolly requested an update regarding NOM 31/2019.
Cllr. P. O'Reilly submitted a Motion, which was seconded by Cllr. A. Cheevers. An amendment was
proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell, and seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley, and accepted by Cllr. P. O'Reilly.
11 Page
The Meetings Administrator advised that the topic of the Motion should be considered by the Procedures
Committee, as part of a review of Standing Orders. The Chief Executive advised that the Motion may not be
in accordance with Standing Orders. It was agreed to defer taking the Motion.
Seconded by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Until such time as the Procedures Committee meet and return with a report and a decision is made by
the Council, that all Motions as of the Agenda for todavs meeting remain on the agenda, regardless
of whether they have been answered, until dealt with at a Council Meeting.
Motion Deferred.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to Adopt Item 1 (a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th July
2019
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
The Draft Minutes were Adopted.
Present: 18
Item 2 (a) Draft Street Performance & Busking Bye-Laws 2019
Mr. D. McMahon reported on the Draft Street Performance and Busking Bye-Laws 2019, and recommended
their adoption, following public consultation and the consideration of the SPC. The proposed
commencement date would be 2nd January, 2020. The draft bye-laws had been compiled following a
recommendation from the Environment SPC and agreed by the City Council.
Comments and queries from Members included:
Regulation of street performance; consultation; protected street scape; derogation; amplification; circle
acts; implementation and enforcement; atmosphere from busking; tourism; European Capital of Culture;
children's street theatre; definition of a crowd/ circle acts; offensive busking; dedicated areas for circle
acts; access to businesses; access for people with disabilities and families; petition; Code of Conduct;
businesses' difficulty hearing phone calls; crowd control; rates contribution of businesses to Galway2020
and city; provision to review bye-laws; times and locations restrictions would apply.
The Mayor invited questions and clarifications.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members' questions and requests for clarification. He
advised that authorised persons listed in the bye-laws would be responsible for enforcement. Section 8
would be principally based on complaints made. Subject to the adoption of the bye-laws, spaces for circle
acts in Eyre Square and Spanish Arch in addition to other areas would be investigated further. Mr. D.
Mahon confirmed that the Bye-Laws as proposed related to specified areas in the City, and did not include
restrictions on circle acts in Eyre Square or the Spanish Arch, or on amplification in these two areas.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed a roll call vote on the making of the Bye-Law. This was seconded by the Mayor, Cllr.
N. McNelis and Cllr. P. O'Reilly.
Cllr. O. Hanley proposed a number of amendments to the Bye-Laws, which were seconded by Cllr. P.
O'Reilly. Clarification was sought regarding the need to go to consultation if amendments which were
material changes were adopted. Mr. D. Mahon advised that additional consultation was not proposed in
this instance.
21 Page
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
These proposals have been created in consultation with the Galway Buskers Community and talking to
business owners on their concerns.
While the Galway Buskers Community continues to believe that byelaws are not a solution to any
ongoing issues, and will hurt Galway's culture of busking, and believes the Council should instead
endorse its Code of Conduct it has agreed to the following amendments to ensure the byelaws are at
the very least functional.
While neither Buskers nor some business owners may be fully pleased with these amendments, they
take into account the public consultation that has been received.
Under Part 1 insert the following definition:
'"Reasonable Background Noise" is an assessment made by an Authorised Person when
measuring the sound volume of a street performance. The assessment takes into account
the location, time, day of the week, weather and traffic conditions and other activities
happening in the area'.
At the start of Part 2 insert the following:
INTRODUCTION
Buskers and street performers enhance Galway's reputation as a vibrant, entertaining and
cultural city. Galway City Council welcomes the opportunity to support high-quality street
performances and to value their contribution to our city. These bye-laws have been
developed to help performers, residents, pedestrians, retailers, workers and visitors
understand the rules around performing on Galway's streets, particularly around noise levels
and accessibility while supporting a vibrant street performance culture. It will take into
account the needs of city residents, businesses, pedestrians and street performers.
The following amendments be made under 'Street Performers and Performance Times'
Section 5 read: a person under 16 years of age can only perform in circumstances where
they are accompanied by an adult for the duration of the performance.
Section 6 read: A Street Performer shall not perform in a public place either before 9.00am
or after 12.00am midnight during the months of APRIL to OCTOBER, and not perform in a
public place either before 9.00am or after 11.00pm during the months of NOVEMBER to
MARCH, SAVE AND EXCEPT as to Silent Acts such as Human Statutes, Pavement Artists,
Balloon Modelers which body of performers shall be excluded from the time limits and
proximity rules as long as using pitches is wholly consistent to their particular art form
provided for hereinafter.
Section 8 be removed entirely
Section 9 read: A Street Performer shall not obstruct the Public's access to and egress from
any premises.
Subheading 'Restrictions on Circle Acts and Amplifications' be renamed 'Restrictions on
Crowding and Noise Levels' and be amended as:
Section 11 be replaced by: All street performers, including Circle Acts as defined in these
Bye-Laws, must ensure that wheelchair access and a minimum of 1.5 meters of unobstructed
footpath width is maintained around the site in which they are performing. If this access is
31 Page
compromised the street performer must stop the performance for a minimum of 5 minutes
to allow access to be restored.
Section 12 be replaced by: Noise from any street performance should not be greater than
Reasonable Background Noise when heard from more than 30 metres, horizontally or
vertically, from where the performance is taking place SAVE AND EXCEPT as directed by the
provisions of any derogation granted under these Bye-Laws DEROGATIONS.
Present: 18
In favour: 6 Against: 12 Abstain: O
The Motion was defeated.
The Mayor proceeded to take a vote on a Motion to adopt and commence the bye-laws as recommended
by the Executive.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to Adopt the Draft Street Performance and Busking Bye-Laws 2019, the commencement date
of which will be January ISt 2020.
In Favour: Cllrs. A. Cheevers, Colette Connolly, John Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, C. Higgins, E. Hoare,
P. Keane, N. Larkin D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty.
Against: Cllrs. M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, N. McNelis, M. O'Connor, P. O'Reilly.
Abstain: O
Present: 18
In Favour: 12 Against: 6
The Draft Street Performance and Busking Bye-Laws 2019 were adopted.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe wished to issue congratulations to the Galway Senior Camogie team on their first senior All-
Ireland crown since 2013. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Item 2 (b) Funding for Homeless Services
Mr. D. Mahon reported on funding for Homeless Services, and requested the approval of Members to
allocate additional funding for homeless services.
Questions and clarifications from Members included:
Homeless crisis; cold weather response; notice of terminations; HAP; landlords; vacant houses; PPP to build
houses; housing targets; source of funding/ savings; Dunmore Affordable Housing and Barna Park; cost of
emergency accommodation; funding from central government; Ardaun; public housing; Vienna Model; rent
pressure zones; affordable housing in Merlin.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to Members questions and clarifications. He advised that the 2019/ 2020 Cold
Weather Response would start earlier this year and will run for a longer period of approx. 6 months. He
advised that Galway City Council has a target to build 1,100 houses over the period 2016-2021, in
conjunction with the Approved Housing Bodies. No frontline services will be affected by this request for
additional funding, which will be allocated through savings from delays in staff recruitment in the current
year.
4 | Page
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to approve additional funding sought, as per Item 2(b) Funding for Homeless Services.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
Additional funding was approved, as per Item 2 (b).
The Mayor proposed that Members take Item 2 (c), and then take a 15 minute break. This was agreed.
Item 2 (c) - Consideration of rate of Local Property Tax under Finance (Local Property Tax) Act
2012 (as amended).
Ms. Nepta Moggan, Interim Head of Finance reported on the Local Property Tax under Finance (Local
Property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended), as a reserved function of Council. Ms. Noggan recommended an
increase in Local Property Tax in order to fund functions such as shared services, boundary extension
payments, long term annual grants, upcoming capital projects including CFRAMs, LED bulb replacement,
roles/ work programmes of the Tourism Officer and Atlantic Corridor Economic Development Officer,
appointment of a Biodiversity Officer, and the Climate Change Strategy, among other expenditure
headings.
The report was discussed. Queries and clarifications from Members included:
Reform of LPT; percentage of LPT retained locally; exemption for OAPs; childcare and service charge costs;
future national changes to LPT; tax based on ability to pay; European Capital of Culture.
Ms. N. Moggan responded comprehensively to Members queries and clarifications, and advised that the
report was a proposal only, based on balancing the preliminary budget. Any amendment to LPT would be
for one year only, and would be decided again in 2020, and year on year. Additional work on the budget
would take place in coming weeks, with a view to producing a balanced Budget Book for consideration by
Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose Local Property Tax be retained at the same rate as present.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
The Motion to retain Local Property Tax at the present rate was passed.
At 5.35pm, the meeting went into Recess.
The Mayor reconvened the meeting at 5.57pm, and proceeded to take Items 4 (d) (e) and (f) for noting.
Item 4 (d) To consider a submission to public consultation on the Western Rail Corridor
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to note Item 4 (d) - Submission to public consultation on the Western Rail Corridor.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
Item 4 (d) — Submission to Public Consultation on the Western Rail Corridor was noted.
51 Page
Cllr. J. Connolly requested the submission be recirculated. The Chief Executive confirmed this.
Item 4 (e) Consultation Paper on the Control of Dogs
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to note Item 4 (e) — Consultation Paper on the Control of Dogs.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
Item 4 (e) — Consultation Paper on the Control of Dogs was noted.
Item 4 (f) Social Inclusion Grants 2019 — for noting
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to note Item 4 (f) Social Inclusion Grants 2019.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
Item 4 (f) — Social Inclusion Grants 2019 was noted.
Item 4 (h) To set the date of the Annual Budget Meeting
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose the Annual Budget Meeting take place at 3.00pm on Monday, 11th November 2019, with the
Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council to take place on Monday 18th of November, 2019.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. Colette Connolly advised the Chief Executive that she wished to submit a Section 140 of the Local
Government Act, 2001 in relation to the Parking Bye-Laws. The motion, set out as follows, signed by 13
Councillors reads as follows: "The following Councillors call on the CEO under Section 140 of the Local
Government Act 2001 to end the current practice of the Executive to refuse parking permits to Residents in
Claddagh on the basis that they have a driveway". The Chief Executive advised that he will circulate a copy
of the motion, in accordance with the provisions of the Act to every Councillor. The Chief Executive will
also agree arrangements with the Mayor to deal with the motion and also advise all Councillors accordingly.
Item 2 (d) Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
Mr. D. Mahon reported on the Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, which was coming before
Members for consideration and adoption, following public consultation. Legislation requires Galway City
Council to adopt a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy by the end of September 2019.
Mr. P. Batty presented the Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy to Members, and advised Members
that the Strategy relates to Galway City Council only. Mr. P. Batty recommended the adoption of the
Strategy to Members.
A discussion ensued.
61 Page
Queries and clarifications from Members included:
Tier 1 Port on Atlantic seaboard; positive impacts of climate change for Galway; increase in tourism; flood
protection; clearing of storm drains; waste water; Blue Flag beaches; coastal erosion; inclusion of non-
Council buildings and tenants; Local Area Plans/ Area Development Plans; overheating buildings; natural
solutions; All Ireland Pollinator Plan; OPW; definition of Just Transition; air pollution; modal shift; case
studies; resources required to implement the strategy; Climate Action Plan; carbon sequestration;
consultation deadlines; financial burden of Carbon emissions; reporting; funding; homelessness; flooding of
homes; bathing prohibitions at beaches; funding from national government; Covenant of Mayors; cruiser
liner; CFRAMS.
Mr. P. Batty, Ms. C. Kilcoyne and Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members' questions, and
advised that resources required to implement the Strategy would be set out in implementation plans,
following adoption. Budgets would be set by Galway City Council following adoption, and would go through
the budget process for approval. Funding would be sought at a national level, should it become available.
Galway City Council will work with the Climate Action Regional Office at a regional level to progress the
Strategy.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
That the Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy with recommended amendment, set out in report
dated 5th September 2019 be adopted.
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
Item 2 (d) Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy was adopted.
Cllr. P. O'Reilly submitted a Motion for consideration. A discussion ensued with Members requesting
clarification if the Motion could be taken, and the practical implications of passing the motion. The Chief
Executive advised that he had some concerns about part of the wording, with similar motions on the
agenda in three different ways. The Chief Executive requested Members review the response to NOM
18/2019 before proceeding, and to consider what is the next step Council takes, should the motion be
passed.
Cllr. O'Reilly advised that the motion could be deferred, providing it would stay on the Agenda. This was
agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
The Motion was deferred, remains on the Agenda until it has been dealt with.
71 Page
Item 2 (f) Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Local
Government (Planning & Development) Act 2000 in respect of the Proposed Disposal of Lands at
Seamus Quirke Road, Galway.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that Item 2 (f) be taken without debate. This was seconded by the Mayor and
agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
To approve Item 2 (f) — Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Local
Government (Planning & Development) Act 2000 in respect of the Proposed Disposal of Lands at
Seamus Quirke Road, Galway. Details of the proposed disposal are as set out in notice dated 30th
August 2019 which was circulated to the Council in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Present: 18
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Item 2 (f) The Disposal of Lands at Seamus Quirke Road, Galway was approved.
Item 2 (e) Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme 2019 — 2024 & Item 3 (a) Corpprate Policy
Group Meeting, 6th September 2019, including to set a date the Procedures Committee to meet.
The Mayor proposed to Members to take Item 2 (e) and Item 3 (a) together. This was agreed.
The Mayor confirmed that the meeting would run until 7.30pm.
The Meetings Administrator reported on the Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme 2019-2024, including
submissions from the consultation process, and the recommendations of the Executive. The Meetings
Administrator made reference to the Report from the CPG meeting on the 6th September 2019, where the
CPG had recommended the adoption of the Draft Scheme as recommended. Draft Minutes from the CPG
meeting would be circulated in due course.
The Meetings Administrator reported that the CPG recommended the adoption of the Draft Scheme as
presented.
Comments and queries from Members included:
Meeting with County Council CPG; Procedures Committee; size of the SPC; Sustainable Development Goals;
spread of CPG representations; change of Chair of an SPC.
The Meetings Administrator responded comprehensively to Members' questions and confirmed that the
issue of a spread of CPG representations being reflective of the current Council would be noted in the
Minutes. Changes in relation to membership of SPC and any changes in SPC Chairs will be in accordance
with the SPC Scheme and the Council's Standing Orders.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
I propose that adoption of the Draft SPC Scheme 2019-2024, as presented.
Present: 18
In favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
The Draft spc Scheme 2019-2024 was adopted.
The Meetings Administrator requested that Members indicate their preferences for two SPCs each, as soon
as possible.
81 Page
The Meetings Administrator advised that an early date will be set for the inaugural meeting of the
Procedures Committee and this will be advised to the members of the Committee at an early date.
Item 9 — Conferences
Item 9 - Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe, and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell,
and agreed.
(d)
Title: Celtic Conferences — A Practical Guide to Budget 2020
Date: 11th- 13th October 2019
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. Eddie Hoare
Title: Creating Economic and Business Opportunities from Climate Change
Date: 9th October 2019
Venue: Tullamore Court Hotel, Tullamore, Co. Offaly
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. Michael Crowe
Title: National PPN 2019 Conference
Date: 10th & 11th October 2019
Venue: Woodford Dolmen Hotel, Carlow
The following Councillors was approved to attend: Cllr. Frank Fahy
Title: Celtic Conferences — Ireland and Plastic Waste
Date: 25th, 26th & 27th October 2019
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty & Cllr. Clodagh Higgins
Approved Training:
(a)
Title: LAMA 2019 Autumn Training Seminar
Date: 17th, 18th & 19th October 2019
Venue: The Falls Hotel, Ennistymon, Co. Clare
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Alan Cheevers
Item 10 — Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations
Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe, and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell,
and agreed.
Sympathies
Noel Hernon, R.I.P.
sally Kelly, R.I.P.
Kathleen Maughan, R.I.P.
Frank Rice, R.I.P.
Margaret Callaghan, R.I.P.
Sarah McGovern, R.I.P.
Fursey Heneghan, R.I.P.
Michelle Coghlan, R.I.P.
Anita Concannon, R.I.P.
Ned Woods, R.I.P.
Mark Walsh, R.I.P.
Carmel O'Shaughnessy (nee Cunningham), R.I.P.
91 Page
Congratulations
• Galway Camogie Senior Team
• Galway Minor Hurling Team
• Shane Lowry
The meeting concluded at 7.35pm.
Item 2 — Business Prescribed by Statute
Draft Regional Spatial & Economic Strategy (RSES) - Material Alterations. Report to follow.
(g)
Not considered.
Item 4 — Consideration of Reports of Officials
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
LED Street Light Replacement Programme. Circulated June 2019. Not considered.
Update on the Irish Language Plan. Circulated June 2019. Not considered.
Sailin to Silverstrand Coastal Protection Scheme. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Transportation Updates - City Centre Pedestrian Area Refurbishment and Bus Connects.
Report circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Parking Bye Laws. Report circulated September 2019. Not considered.
National Revaluation Programme. Report circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Brexit — Implications for Galway. To hear a Report. Not considered.
Chief Executive's Report
July 2019. Circulated July 2019. Taken as Noted.
September 2019. Report circulated September 2019. Not considered.
ii.
Quarterly Report, April to June 2019
ii.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Housing — Report attached. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Environment & Climate Change. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Recreation & Amenity. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Economic Development & Culture. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Community & Sports Development. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
IO I Page
Item 5 — Notices of Motion
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty,
D. Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of
civil society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. To remain on Agenda for September 2019 Meeting.
NOM 19/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning,
Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
•
Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority Area
for the display of authorised election material
That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
That all election candidates be given equal space for display
That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down
by law
Not considered.
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund scheme
specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
Not considered.
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force personnel.
Not considered.
111 Page
NOM 31/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 17th June 2019
That GCC calls on the Government to commit to:
Greater urgency in setting up the Judicial Council to review levels of awards for personal injuries.
Awards for soft tissue injuries must be brought down significantly in line with international norms.
A zero tolerance approach to fraud with the setting up of a dedicated central Gardai resource
specifically tasked with investigating fraudulent cases for potential prosecution.
Not considered.
NOM 33/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 24th June 2019
That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence
as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli Burca, Sli
Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin
located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway.
Not considered.
NOM 34/2019 Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her
Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their
personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal
autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
Not considered.
NOM 37/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 1st July 2019
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to deliver on a 2008 Labour Court ruling to provide
pension entitlement to supervisors on Community Employment schemes in the state. The
Government's inaction on the 2008 decision is totally undermining the Labour Court and causing undue
hardship to supervisors that made no alternative arrangements on foot of this historical Court decision.
Not considered.
NOM 38/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 1st July 2019
"That Galway City Council make a decision to become carbon neutral by 2023, by:
• The installation of solar panels at City Hall, to generate electric energy,
• That all vehicles owned by Galway City Council should either run on bio fuels or be electrically
operated, within the same time period, i.e. by 2023;
• That carbon savings be published annually.
That Galway City Council, as a legacy to Galway 2020, should make a further decision to:
seek to establish a hydro electric energy generator, on a community basis, on waterways in
Galway city, and
• Galway City Council should decide to apply to the relevant fund of €250million at the Department
of Energy which was heretofore set up by Minister Richard Bruton, in order to effect a plan to
counter the use of fossil fuels and assist in promoting a cleaner, greener environment, and in so
doing be cost neutral also, relative to this proposal."
Response issued with Agenda 4th September 2019
121 Page
NOM 39/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 1st July 2019
"That Galway City Council make a decision to pursue an application to seek to establish 'National Parks
Status for Merlin Park Wood', because of its unique flora and habitats, and seek funding as follows:
• Merlin Park Wood and its habitats, has invariably been described as far back as 1982, as one of the
last 5 regenerating woods in Europe, and should be given the same status as St. Anne's Park in
Raheny, which has Heritage Status, and
• Upgrading of Merlin Park Wood and its habitats to achieve this status should be funded by the
relevant fund available under the Habitat's Directive of the European Commission - Council
Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992."
Response issued 5th September 2019.
NOM 40/2019 Notice given by: cur. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 5th July 2019
"That Galway City Council upgrade the facilities at Ballyloughnane Beach to include such works as car
park surfacing, toilet improvements and to generally improve the area for the benefit of local people
and visitors."
Response issued 5th September 2019.
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020 marking the
centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred in Galway during 1920
including but not exclusive to:
The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke in
September 1920.
The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces. n
Not considered.
NOM 42/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. Keane
Date received: 8th Aug 2019
In the interests of Child Safety & Welfare and consistency throughout Galway City Council's area of
competent jurisdiction, that this Council will immediately erect 30km per hour / Children at Play
Signage at all Vehicular Entrances to the Glenard Estate in Salthill.
Response issued with Agenda 4th September 2019
NOM 43/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and the Minister
of State for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special responsibility for Equality,
Immigration and Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the closure of all Galway based Direct
Provision Centres and instead, offer residents suitable, community-based accommodation and services
for children and families.
Not considered.
13 | Page
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries warning about
the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure to electromagnetic
radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on Comm Reg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a working
group to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and human health due to
the current questionable scientific knowledge."
Not considered.
NOM 45/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 2nd September 2019
Galway City Council recognises the need for a visual arts space for the City and further agrees to discuss
with An Post and other relevant stakeholders the possibility of securing funding to develop the An Post
site on William Street for cultural purposes.
Not considered.
NOM 46/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
I call on this council to either cut back or remove overgrown trees that are blocking road signs
throughout the city boundary.
Not considered.
Item 6 - Questions
Q4/2019
Question given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 26th June 2019
I wish to seek an explanation from City Council officials for the delay in advancing plans for the design
and construction of the Commemorative Arch to be located on the riverside walk at O'Brien's Bridge,
considering the fact that €70,000 has been ring-fenced for this project, and to seek a full report on the
current state of progress.
Not considered.
Item 7 - Correspondence
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
Seminar notice - Midlands Regional Transition Team in conjunction with the Eastern & Midlands
CARO & Local Enterprise Office Offaly. Circulated June 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Gear6id Ö Conluain, National University of Ireland, Galway.
Circulated June 2019. Not considered.
Letter received from Padraic Faherty, 10th June 2019. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Clare Co Co Notice of Motion, received 21st June 2019. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government on 13th May
2019. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Department of Justice & Equality on 17th June 2019. Circulated July
2019. Not considered.
141 Page
(h)
(j)
(k)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
Correspondence received from Office of the Minister for Justice & Equality on 24th June 2019.
Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
NOAC Local Authority Satisfaction Survey 2019. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission on 27th June 2019.
Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence & memorial card received from The Brennan Family on 26th June 2019. Circulated
July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence from Portershed to May Economic SPC. Circulated July 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Waterford City & County Council on 25th July 2019. Circulated
September 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Office of the Minister, Department of Housing, Planning & Local
Government on 8th July 2019. Circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Office of the Minister for Employment Affairs & Social Protection on
17th July 2019. Circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from Employment Rights Policy Section, Department of Employment
Affairs & Social Protection on 18th July 2019. Circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Correspondence received from the NWRA re New Corporate Plan on 30th August 2019. Circulated
September 2019. Not considered.
Item 8 - Items for Councillors' Information
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
National Day of Commemoration, Sunday 14th July 2019. Circulated June 2019. Not considered
6th Festival of History — 31st La Touche Legacy Weekend, 13th & 14th September 2019. Circulated
June 2019. Not considered
Correspondence received from Register of Lobbying on 25th June 2019 re Regulation of Lobbying
Act 2015 (the Act) — "Relevant bodies" operating under the Transparency Code. Circulated July
2019. Not considered
Note of thank you received on 4th July 2019 from Rev. Helen Freeburn, United Methodist
Presbyterian Church. Circulated September 2019. Not considered.
Item 11 — Other Business Set Forth in the Notice Convening the Meeting
None
Item 12 — Any Other Business
a)
Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
Advisory Group of Ballinfoile Castlegar Neighbourhood Centre
2 positions as per request of the Advisory Group - One representative for the Central Ward and
One representative for the East Ward.
(Non Group — Appointment by Vote).
Not Considered.
Mi
'"erl Signed
Mayc;n oj Galway
15 | Page
