Presiding:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 9th October, 2017,at 4.00 p.m.,
in Aula Maxima Boardroom, The Quadrangle,
National University of Ireland, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Present: Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
In Attendance:
Apologies:
M. Cubbard, M. Farrell, Cllr. P. Keane, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, N. McNelis,
T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
President J. Browne, National University of Ireland, Galway,
. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive,
. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms
P. Philbin A/Director of Services,
N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance/A/Director of Services,
Ms.
L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Ms.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
C. Phelan, Senior Planner,
Ms.
. G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Mr
. D. Flood, A/ Senior Executive Engineer,
Mr
. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms
Ms. M. Coen, Senior Staff Officer.
Cllrs. F. Fahy, N. Larkin & D. McDonnell.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with the newly adopted Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
SIGNING & ENDORSEMENT OF THE POTIERS DECLARATION
Mayor Flannery welcomed all and referred to the unique occasion in the Aula Maxima to
sign and endorse the Potiers declaration to enhance collaboration between the University
and Galway City Council.
President J. Browne welcomed the meeting to the Aula Maxima in the University's historic
Quadrangle. He referred to the bonds of town and gown giving examples of ancient records
of Galway Corporation in the University Library, generations of students that go on to
become the lifeblood of the City and most recently the role the University played in helping
to secure the European Capital of Culture title. He referred to last year's Annual Meeting of
the Coimbra Group in Potiers, France — where the theme was "The University and the City"
and the establishment of a Potiers declaration to which all members have been invited to
become signatories.
Both Mayor Flannery and President Browne signed the declaration which was endorsed by
the full Council.
1
Following this, Mayor Flannery proposed that the Meeting rise at 7.30 p.m. for a 15 minute
break and continue until 8.45 p.m. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed that the Meeting rise and finish at 7.30 p.m., this was seconded
by Cllr. C. Connolly. Votes were taken on the matter.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
"That The Meeting rise at 7.30 p.m. for a 15 minute break and continue until 8.45 p.m."
In Favour: 2
Against: 13
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Abstain: O
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
"That the Meeting rise and finish at 7.30 p.m."
In Favour: 13
Against: 2
Abstain: O
The Motion was carried.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 11th September
2017
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty referred to the layout of the Agenda and proposed that new agenda
items be added down the list and not before old agenda items.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to minutes of the September Ordinary Meeting referencing Agenda
Item 2 (c) Section 183 Notice - Proposal for disposal of Lands at Dun na Mara, Renmore and
he advised that he supported the proposal that Standing Orders be suspended so that a roll
call vote could be taken on the matter along with Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and Cllr. F. Fahy. He also
noted that the names of individuals and voting on Roll Call should be listed in the minutes.
He confirmed that under Item 2(d) that he proposed the motion that there be no variation
in setting of the Local Property Tax under S.20 Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012, as
amended, and this motion was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
As a matter of accuracy, Cllr. B. Cameron referred to the proposal he put forward under
Item 2(a) To consider a Mid-Term Review of Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 —
2018 pursuant to the Traveller Accommodation Act 1998. He confirmed this proposal was to
consider and adopt Item 2(c). This was confirmed by Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir who seconded the
motion and it was agreed.
2
A synopsis of matters arising raised by Councillors were:
• Request for timeline for works on playgrounds in particular those awaiting works;
Request for confirmation that works be completed on the Salmon Weir bridge before
Christmas;
Request for confirmation of Ballinfoile opening hours, reference to press release from
SCCUL and the advertisement of a contract post for facility manager;
Request for LIS Scheme Update;
Corrib Great Southern site Update;
Request for date of Civic Reception for Senior & Minor Galway Hurling teams;
Request for update from Expert Group on any proposed amalgamation;
Request for details regarding enforcement relating to bonfires and burning of copper
wire;
Discussion regarding locations in the City for a temporary halting site;
Status of funding for CENA project;
Request for timeline regarding meeting for reconstitution of Inter Agency Traveller
group;
Update on replacement of parking meters and confirmation if facility to park by text will
be available;
Status of sale of Tourist Office;
Confirmation regarding European Capital of Culture expenditure from Galway County
Council;
Reference to Grafitti removal pilot project and request for City Council to deal swiftly to
any hate crime graffiti;
Confirmation requested regarding start date of works at Cappagh Park and timeline for
completion of works;
Confirmation as to when tender for City centre resurfacing will be advertised and
timeline of proposed works;
Replies were issued on matters of clarification by Mr. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive,
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services and Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services.
The Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (a) Section 183 Notice - Proposal for disposal of Lands at rear of 129 Villa Nova Mews,
Salthill
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane.
There was a lengthy discussion on this item with Councillors examining the Report
circulated, valuations and noting the Recreational & Amenity zoning of the land.
Mr. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive set out the background referring to the Report
circulated to the Councillors.
3
Cllr. C. Connolly referenced rezoning of Recreation & Amenity lands in the Development
Plan process and was surprised that some Councillors were now expressing that they may
not be in favour of disposal of these Recreation and Amenity zoned lands. A number of
Councillors expressed disquiet in relation to Cllr. C. Connolly's comment.
Cllr. B. Cameron requested the use of the new S183 Notices Policy, whereby Notices should
come before local Councillors for discussion in advance of being brought to Council
meetings.
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty referred to a proposed amendment no. 14 by Cllr. P. Keane which
recommended that S183 Notices should be put into a local newspaper to inform the public.
Mr. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive advised that the current Application had been on the
Council agenda in advance of the new policy and agreed that all further Notices would be
dealt with in the manner requested and in line with the new policy. Mayor Flannery then
proceeded to take a Vote:
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
"Section 183 Notice - Proposal for disposal of Lands at rear of 129 Villa Nova Mews,
Salthill" - as per the Report circulated.
In Favour: 14
Against: 1
Abstain: O
The Motion was carried.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3. (a) Report from Environment, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee - Draft
Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2017
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed that the Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2017 be put
on display for public consultation. This was seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron.
Councillors on the committee and subcommittee were complimented on their good work on
compiling the draft byelaws.
A lengthy discussion was held by Councillors regarding the draft byelaws including reference
to a site visit to Shop street on a Saturday, observations, narrow streetscape, amplification,
speakers, microphones, review period to be 6 months, reference to Notice of Motion 11309
raised by Cllr. T. Flaherty in 2009 regarding amplification, reference that some acts need
amplification like dancers, suggested use of battery powered amplification, reference to
reduction in footfall of 25% when busking was banned in Melbourne, proposed permit
system for children under 16 years, reference to parental presence for children, proposal to
facilitate groups at Spanish Arch and Eyre Square, reference to Dublin City Council busking
byelaws, reference to impact of noise levels on businesses, enforcement of byelaws, issue
with noise levels and not busking, legislate for the greater good of all, distances between
pitchs/stands, reference to alleged bullying of children busking and time limits on pitches
i.e. 2 hours.
4
There was general agreement amongst the Councillors that Galway City is renowned for its
busking, art, festivals and friendly welcome.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services confirmed that it was proposed to put the Draft
Byelaws on display and this was agreed by the Members.
The Mayor proceeded to take a Vote:
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"To put the Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2017 on display for public
consultation"
In Favour: 14
Against: 1
The Motion was carried.
Abstain: O
The Mayor proposed that Items 3 (b), (c), (d) & (e) be taken together and this was agreed.
(b) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 10th February, 2017
Noted.
(c) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 19th June, 2017
Noted.
(d) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 8th September, 2017
Noted.
(e) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 15th September, 2017
Noted.
The Mayor referred to the proposed funding under the Marketing Fund. There was
general consensus that Councillors require more detail with regard to recommended
funding under the Marketing Fund. A lengthy discussion was held amongst Councillors
with regard to each of the Events and individual opinions regarding same.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services gave background information regarding each Event
and the recommended funding proposed under the Marketing Fund.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir proposed to increase funding to the Connacht Fleadh from €7,500 to
€10,500. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly. A Vote was taken on the Motion:
"To increase funding for Connacht Fleadh from €7,500 to €10,500".
Proposed: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
In Favour: 11
Against: 3
The Motion was carried.
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
Abstain: 1
5
Mayor Flannery then proceeded to take a vote on funding for remaining events
recommended funding under the Marketing Fund.
Recommended Funding Proposed under Marketing Fund:
0 seaFest: €50,000
o Meet in Galway/Convention Bureau: €5,000
o Food on the Edge: €10,000
o Galway Masters International Basketball Tournament: €3,000
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
In Favour: 14
The Motion was carried.
Against: O
Abstain: 1
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Chief Executive's Report for October 2017.
Deferred
(b) Chief Executive's Report for September 2017.
Deferred
(c) Draft Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities 2017.
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services outlined the key areas and recommendations in the
Draft Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities 2017 and she advised that the
Report was for noting by Councillors.
A discussion ensued amongst Councillors referring to Housing Adaptation Grants,
extensions, policies, reference to omission of spend on local authority housing grants and
status of tenant purchase scheme for persons with disabilities.
Cllr. B. Cameron discussed the proposal of a Motion expressing opinion that the Draft Plan
unless amended fails local authority tenants and he proceeded to request a Motion that
an additional Objective be added to Page 13.
The Mayor suggested that the Draft Report be noted by Councillors and then the
document be referred back to the Strategic Policy Committee. This was agreed and a Vote
was then taken on the Motion.
"To ensure that the housing needs of people with disabilities living in Local Authority
Housing are prioritised and that when disabled extensions are solutions to these needs
that funding will always be applied for to central government and extensions delivered.
Proposed By: Cllr. B. Cameron
For: 13
Against: O
Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
Abstain: O
6
(d) Draft National Planning Framework (NPF), Ireland 2040 - Our Plan
Report on Draft National Planning Framework.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services updated Councillors in relation to the Draft National
Planning Framework outlining the key issues. Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner gave a
detailed synopsis with regards to the consultation process and she advised that she had
cross referenced the draft ten year plan with priorities for Galway City. She confirmed that
the closing date for submissions was the 3rd November 2017 and that a Workshop would
be facilitated for Councillors by the Planning Department in relation to contributing to a
submission by Galway City Council.
A lengthy discussion ensued with reference to investment in the City, enablers, housing,
regional disparity, employment, proposed sale of lands at Ceannt station, Dublin Road,
harbour development, competition, accessibility between cities, metropolitan plans, state
lands, drainage, Ardaun, items omitted including double train line from Athlone to
Galway, traffic situation, lands in need of industrial development in the Westside of the
City, accommodation crisis for students and tourist accommodation.
Mr. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive emphasised the importance of making a
submission on this important draft document. Mr. Connell proposed a workshop on Friday
20th November 2017 at 9 a.m. Cllr. M. Farrell advised that she was unavailable on this
date. A vote was then taken on the proposed date.
'IA Workshop facilitated by the Planning Department be held on Friday 20th November
2017 at 9 a.m.".
For: 11
Against: O
Abstain: 1
The Meeting date was agreed.
Cllr. P. Keane referred to the challenge in the delivery of the Galway Transport Strategy
and referred to the fact that 50% of workers travelling into the City live in the County. He
then proceeded to submit a motion in writing to the Mayor.
Mr. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive advised that regular meetings are being held with
the National Transport Authority, Galway County Council and the IDA to expedite and
work through traffic issues in this particular area. The following Motion was proposed:
Proposed: Cllr. Peter Keane
Seconded: Cllr. MJ Crowe
"That Galway City Council will work with An Garda Siochåna and other relevant agencies to
include Galway County Council and Transport Infrastructure Ireland on a three month pilot
basis to arrange the immediate deployment of Gardai for morning and evening traffic
management duties to ease the congestion both entering and exiting the Parkmore
Industrial Estate and that the cost of providing the additional Gardai be met from current
resources within City Hall, County Buildings and from Transport Infrastructure Ireland".
For: IO Against: 2
Abstain: 1
The Motion was passed.
7
(e) Report on Draft River Basin Management Plan for the West Region.
Deferred.
(f) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th September 2017
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development.
Items (i) to (v) deferred
(g) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17
Deferred
(h) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway
Deferred
(i) European Capital of Culture, 2020
Deferred
(j) BREXIT
(i) Impacts / preparation / planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from Brexit
(iii) The view from Irish Local Government
Items j (i) and (ii) and (iii) were deferred
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
Notices of Motion hereunder were deferred.
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities
8
NOM 23/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
3rd October, 2016.
"l call on the Chief Executive to earmark and designate the 1.4 acre site in the Westside as a
Cultural and Artistic hub to cater for a mix of organisations specialising with children and
youth".
NOM 01/ 17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr D. McDonnell
3rd January 2017
"l hereby propose that a variation of the City Development Plan is initiated forthwith to
provide for the re-zoning of lands of 1.2 acres at Greenfields, Newcastle, in the ownership of
Rory Rogers c/o McCarthy Keville O'Sullivan, block 1, Financial Services Building,
Moneenagheisha Road, Galway. The proposed variation is in the interest of proper planning
and sustainable development and having regard to the housing crisis that currently exists in
Galway City."
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open.
We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
NOM 3/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. J. Walsh
25th January, 2017
"l am calling on Galway City Council to expedite the preparation of the Draft Local Area Plan
for Ardaun. These lands have been identified as one of the major urban housing delivery
sites with a potential yield of 500 units in the medium term subject to progress on the Local
Area Plan".
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible".
9
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a Chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil né ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur
chun cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural
Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council meeting on 10th April, 2017 and requested
to be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees.
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the
full Council for consideration
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing
a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
10
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free
to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches.
This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which
belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State
investment from taxpayer money".
NOM 15/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
29th August, 2017.
"l call on Galway City Council to formally make an application for grant funding under the
Department of Justice and Equality Community Based CCTV Scheme in order to provide
CCTV cameras at Woodquay-Steamers Quay in order to combat anti-social behaviour and in
the interest of public safety. If the application be successful the cameras then be installed in
consultation with Woodquay Residents Association"
Cllr. T. O Flaherty
NOM 16/17 Notice given by:
4th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"l call on this Council to make an application for grant aid funding for Community Based
CCTV from the Department of Justice and Equality for the provision of the long awaited
cameras for Walter Macken Place, Mervue, Coilte and Sruthan Mhuirlinne, Ballybane.
This new scheme is intended to support local communities who wish to have the installation
of CCTV security systems installed with the aim of increasing public safety which will help to
deter illegal anti social behaviour activities in their areas '
Cllr. D. Lyons at Planning SPC Meeting
NOM 19/17 Notice given by:
18th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"l propose that Galway City Council would seek expressions of interest for the building of
social and affordable homes on land banks in the ownership of Galway City Council to
alleviate the present/ongoing housing crisis."
Cllr. M. Lohan
NOM 20/17 Notice given by:
20th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"The heritage of our city is unique and diverse with both urban, rural and waterfront beauty
within our borders. Coolough Village, above the banks of the Corrib, is a bucolic oasis within
Galway City. The old roads, boreens and pathways are now a nature wonderland and an
idyllic and vital historical reminder of our past. Galway City Council commends the area
residents for their combined work in maintaining and cleaning the boreens. The use of this
rustic jewel in Heritage Week walks and their continued use by residents enhances the life
of our city. It is essential that the boreens are protected and cared for so that future
generations can continue to use and enjoy this unique amenity. This City Council supports
the residents as they work with Heritage Ireland and other agencies to preserve, protect and
enhance Coolough and its environs."
11
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
6. QUESTIONS
QI/17
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
February, 2017.
Can I please have an update on the water Safety Audit for Galway City that was requested
over 12 months ago. When will it be published, distributed. What are the plans for it. Who
is the point of contact that will be working to deliver safety works. What is/has been the
delay in getting the audit done. Who is in charge of audit in City Hall.
This has been a very sad year again for the amount of persons who have entered the water
across the city, I have been working with a number of groups who are trying to put in place
a system to recover victims quicker. The next step is prevention.
Item 6. Deferred.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
None.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations.
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower.
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017.
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway. Further reply to
issue.
Letter from C. O'Connor, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 4th August 2017.
Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and County Council.
Letter from Mr. Brendan Holland on behalf of Galway City Business Association and
Eyre Square All Ireland Screen Committee.
12
(g)
Letter from M. Cleary, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Offaly County
Council dated 19th September 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Offaly County Council.
Above Items (a) to (g) deferred.
9. CONFERENCES
Conferences and Approved Training Events listed were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and
seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
1) Title: Chartered Association of Building Engineers (CABE) Conference buiiding 2017
Date: 29th September 2017
Venue: City North Hotel & Conference Centre, Gormanston, Co. Meath
2) Title: Sheehy Skeffington School, Borders & Belonging, Migrants & Membership: Putting
the Human back into Human Rights
Date: 7th October 2017
Venue: Carmelite Community Centre, Aungier Street, Dublin 2
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. B. Cameron
3) Title: GeoparkLlFE: Tourism for Conservation Conference
Date: 23rd November 2017
Venue: The Falls Hotel, Ennistymon, Co. Clare
4) Title: The Future of Towns Summit
Date: 18th October 2017
Venue: Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo
Notification already circulated 29th September 2017
5) Title: Celtic Conferences — Rebuilding Ireland — Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness
Date: 3rd 4th & 5th November 2017
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
6) Title: Celtic Conferences — The Fair Deal Scheme — What's the deal with Nursing Home
Care?
Date: 17th 18th & 19th November 2017
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
7) Title: Celtic Conferences — Invasive Exotic Species of Wildlife in Irish Rivers, Canals & Lakes
Date: 24th 25th & 26th November 2017
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. P. Conneely
8) Title: Let's Talk Tourism! National Tourism Forum
Date: 10th & 11th November 2017
Venue: The Brehon, Killarney, Co. Kerry
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. P. Conneely
13
a Signa
Mayor M Gabwy
Approved Training
1) Title: AILG Autumn Seminar
Date: 12th - 13th October 2017
Venue: Sligo Park Hotel, Sligo
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. J. Walsh, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr.
Declan McDonnell & Cllr. C. Connolly.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Dermot Moran (RIP)
Mr. Liam Cosgrave (RIP)
Ms. Sophie Coll (RIP)
Mr. Stephen Francis (RIP)
A Motion was submitted to the Mayor by Cllr. M. Farrell. This was seconded by Cllr. B.
Cameron.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Farrell
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"That Galway City Council expresses solidarity with the people of Catalonia after their
recent referendum for independence".
For: 9
Against: 2
The Motion was passed.
Votes of Congratulations:
Abstain: 1
Congratulations to Mr. Padraic Creaven on winning first place in the Under 20 and Under 23
All Ireland Championships for Weightlifting, 2017.
Congratulations to Castlegar Minor Hurling Panel on becoming County Minor 'A' Champions.
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting ended at 7.30 p.m.
14