Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 9th November, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Virtual Attendees:
In Attendance:
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Higgins & P. Keane.
A. Finn, Administrative Officer
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
T. Prendergast, A/Director of Services
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
. E. Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that Item 2(d) be considered as the first item on the agenda in order to
facilitate remote access for Councillors to attend the meeting.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(d) Revision of Standing Orders in relation to remote meetings
Councillors discussed the proposed supplementary Standing Orders for remote meetings. Matters
raised included public participation; that Councillors could choose whether to use the video function
when attending meetings remotely or where practicable as stated in the standing orders and a
request for examination of any issues with zoom technology to facilitate the inclusion of the public.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator advised the meeting that the guidelines were discussed and
approved by the majority present at the recent Procedures Committee and Corporate Policy Group
meetings. He added that the 8 no. supplementary Standing Orders are based on guidelines received
from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage with two proposed additions to
same.
Mi es, Cone r ed&Signed
1
Mayor of Galway
Mayor Cubbard took a vote as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To approve 2(d) Revision of Standing Orders in relation to remote meetings — per Report
circulated Friday 6th November 2020.
In Favour: 12 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Councillors C. Higgins and P. Keane were admitted to attend the meeting virtually.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
To have an adjournment of the November Council meeting on Monday 16th November 2020 at
3 p.m. in Leisureland
This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th October & Adjournment of meeting held on
19th October
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th October & Adjournment
of meeting held on 19th October.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Matters Arising
Cllr. M.J. Crowe referred to NOM 28/2020 which he raised at the September Council meeting
requesting that the matter be resolved in a meaningful way.
NOM 28/2020
Submitted under SO 34 at the September Council Meeting. Request to leave on the Agenda at
the October Council meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That Galway City Council immediately move to implement the assurances given to the Collins
Family before, during and after the 'Kirwan Roundabout Part VIII Process'. These assurances were
given both publicly and privately. Despite this the family have largely been ignored and this needs
to be urgently addressed.'
Councillors discussed and supported the motion. Matters raised included the request for a report
on the matter.
2
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that Galway City Council has requested a meeting with the
family and will clarify the situation at the next adjournment meeting scheduled for Monday 16th
November 2020.
Clarification was sought on traffic management and the opening of Middle Street and a request for
a report on NOM 24/2020 regarding parking in the city.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) (i) To rescind the agreed date for the holding of the Annual Budget Meeting — scheduled
for 16th November 2020
(ii) To set a new date for the Annual Budget Meeting— proposed for 30th November 2020
Mayor Cubbard read out the proposal under agenda item 2(a)(i) & 2a(ii).
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote in line with Standing
Orders.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
2(a) (i) To rescind the agreed date for the holding of the Annual Budget Meeting
— scheduled for 16th November 2020
2(a) (ii) To set a new date for the Annual Budget Meeting — proposed for 30th November 2020
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr N. Larkin, Cllr. D.
Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis , Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Annual Budget date was agreed for Monday 30th November 2020.
2(b) Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004, Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) Bye-Laws No.
1 — 2020, Consideration of Report and Bye-laws for adoption
Mayor Cubbard proposed the deferral of Agenda Item 2(b) as a Transportation Strategic Policy
Committee Meeting was scheduled for Tuesday 10th November 2020 with Speed limits on the
agenda. This was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare and agreed.
The Chief Executive advised that speed limits agenda item on the agenda of the Transportation SPC
is a different matter than the Agenda Item 2(b).
3
2(c) Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020 — 2026
Councillors discussed the Draft Contribution Scheme and matters raised included: affordable housing
issues; promotion of building of 1-2 bed units; phased payment of contributions and job creation.
Cllr. O. Hanley proposed that the draft scheme be reviewed and referred back to the Planning SPC as
the current proposed scheme would result in a reduction of contributions received from
developments.
The Chief Executive responded to queries raised. He confirmed that it is proposed to put the draft
scheme on public display for the period 26th November 2020 until mid-January 2021. After the
display period, a report with consideration of submissions received will come before Council in early
2021 and for the adoption of a new Scheme.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
2(c) Approval of Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020 - 2026 for public consultation -
per Report circulated on Friday 6th November 2020
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr N. Larkin, Cllr. D.
Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis , Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. O. Hanley
In Favour: 17 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2020 — 2026 was approved for public consultation.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Draft note of Procedures Committee Meeting held on Thursday 5th November 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Motion to note Item 3(a) Draft note of Procedures Committee Meeting held on Thursday 5th
November 2020.
This was agreed and noted.
3(b) Draft note of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Friday 6th November 2020
The note of the CPG meeting stated that the Mayor closed the meeting. Mayor Cubbard advised
that he had departed this meeting and Cllr. D. Lyons was the chair in his absence. It was agreed that
the minutes will reflect this.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Motion to note Item 3(b) Draft note of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Friday 6th
November 2020
This was agreed and noted.
4
Councillors raised matters including: implementation of Sports Grant criteria; withdrawal of GCCN
from two SPCs and demolitions of derelict sites.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised in relation to the Sports Grant
criteria.
3(c) Note of Planning Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on Tuesday 3rd November
2020
Item 3(c) Note of Planning Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on Tuesday 3rd November
2020 was noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) To consider correspondence dated 06th October 2020 received from Department of Transport
relating to Galway Harbour
Mayor Cubbard put to the meeting that item 4(a) be taken as read. This was agreed.
Councillors discussed the letter and welcomed the Department's engagement with the European
Commission to include Galway Port under the Trans-European Network (TEN-T) Regulation (EU) No
1315/2013 which is an EU policy with the aim of developing a Europe-wide network including ports.
Councillors discussed planning permission at Galway Harbour, offshore renewable energy, reliance
on car parking charges, option for review in 3 years; lack of democratic authority, use of public realm
and to request a meeting if the City Council become shareholders.
The Chief Executive gave background to Councillors regarding the two options available under the
Harbours Act 2015 which had been on the agenda since last December and was discussed in detail
at previous Council meetings. He advised that this was an executive function but he wished for
consensus from the Council on the matter. He outlined the two options:
1. Transfer of shareholding of the Port Company to Galway City Council
2. Dissolve the Port Company entirely and Galway City Council take over its functions and
operation.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator took a Roll Call Vote on the following Motion proposed by
Cllr. D. McDonnell in line with Standing Orders as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To propose the transfer of shareholding of the Port Company to Galway City Council under the
Harbours Act 2015'
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr N. Larkin, Cllr. D.
Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis , Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly
In Favour: 17 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was passed.
5
4(b) Report on key projects of the Galway Transport Strategy (includes Agenda items
deferred from the October meeting of Galway City Council)
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer referred to the Galway Transport Strategy and outlined the core
principles of the strategy; funding of transport capital projects; city context and some of the
key projects currently being progressed as part of the GTS: N6 Galway City Ring Road; Galway
City Centre Access Network, Cross City Link (Phase 1), Bus Connects Galway Non-Statutory
Public consultation, enabling Public Realm Projects including Pedestrian Network, Wayfinding
and Permeability. Mr. Finn advised that funding has been sought through URDF Call 2 and he
gave an update on other projects including Salmon Weir Pedestrian/Cycle Bridge, BusConnects
Galway: Dublin Road, Kirwan Roundabout Upgrade, Martin Roundabout, City Centre
Pedestrian Area Rehabilitation Programme and Parkmore.
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer joined the meeting remotely and gave a presentation on
other key capital projects currently being progressed as part of the GTS including: the cycle
network, City Cycle Network Stage 1 - East, City Cycle Network Stage 2 — West, Greenways and
future cycling infrastructure. Ms. Finn outlined other projects including the Clifden Railway
Pedestrian & Cycle Bridge, Ceannt Station Regeneration, Public Lighting Accelerated LED
Energy Upgrade Programme, Park and Ride, Bus Network Review, Public Realm Strategy, Speed
Limit Review, B6thar na dTreabh, Extension of Areas with 50 km/hr, 30 km/hr Housing Estate
Slow Zones, School Zones Pilot and COVID/ Stimulus Funding (NTA).
Ms. R. McNally, A/Director of Services referred to the National Planning Framework and the
ambitious targets for Galway city. She outlined projects under the URDF 2020 covering
transport connectivity, public realm spaces, innovation and creativity district, east city urban
district and community. Ms. McNally outlined constraints and opportunities regarding the
delivery of projects.
Ms. McNally gave an overview to Councillors of the current status of different projects whether
at design, planning or construction stage. Horizontal Projects, key milestones and anticipated
completion dates were outlined to the meeting.
Councillors discussed the presentation and matters raised included: the need to consider
human impact of works proposed; early consultation, loss of trees, aspects of the current on-
line non-statutory consultation process for Dublin Road including the consideration of a facility
to respond to questions and a table of contents and a request was made for a copy of plans for
Dublin Road project.
Mayor Cubbard noted Cllrs. O. Hanley, P. Keane and A. Cheevers were seeking to speak and
advised that they be facilitated at the next adjournment meeting to commence on the 16th
November 2020, where transport item 4(b) will continue to be discussed.
The Meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
6
DRAFT Minutes of the Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
held on Monday 16th November, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Higgins, N. Larkin
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Ms.
Ms.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr.
F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
A. Finn, Administrative Officer (Virtually via Zoom)
S. Loughnane, Senior Transport Project Manager
Ms.
. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Ms
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
B. Gallagher, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllr. C. Connolly, Deputy Mayor welcomed all to the meeting. She advised that a number of
Councillors were to be given the opportunity to speak on agenda item 4(b) following the
November Council meeting held on Monday 9th November.
4(b) Report on key projects of the Galway Transport Strategy (includes Agenda items
deferred from the October meeting of Galway City Council)
Individual Councillors discussed transportation matters; queries and clarifications raised
included: governance and delivery of transport projects, community and stakeholder
engagement, non-statutory consultation process and dates for same, status of Moycullen
greenway and funding of greenways, status of recruitment, Galway Transportation Strategy,
update on Martin roundabout, merging or cut line between Dublin Road and Cross City link
projects, proposal for bus lanes on motorway to Parkmore, Eastside cycling pump and repair
stations, overall cost and source of funding of BusConnects, request for stakeholder meetings,
status of Salthill 401 and 402 bus routes, request for temporary crossing at Skerritt roundabout
and a request regarding plans for Browne roundabout and a temporary crossing near same,
welcoming of the July stimulus funding, Park and Ride progress including at NUIG and churches
for dedicated school transport; Parkmore Strategy and whether there is a proposal for a bus
link from Ballybrit to Parkmore; update on bus corridor through the regional hospital and
access to University Road, Tuam Road bus corridor right turn to Ballybane and Salthill in the
context of the mobility plan.
7
Cllr. A. Cheevers proposed the use of Galway airport site as a potential park and ride facility.
This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer responded to queries and clarifications raised in detail giving
updates on the various key projects in the city including the N6 Galway Ring Road process, the
Galway Transport Strategy, BusConnects, COVID temporary works, update on various
roundabouts and park and ride.
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer responded to queries including consultation, funding and
the park and stride project.
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services updated Councillors on greenway projects submitted by
Galway County Council that were granted funding. She advised that the National Transport
Authority fund cycleway projects for regional cities including Galway city. Ms. McNally
responded to other queries and clarifications raised by Councillors.
Mr. B. McGrath gave a comprehensive reply to matters raised by Councillors.
Mayor Cubbard proposed an adjournment meeting on Monday 23rd November 2020 at 3 p.m. in
Leisureland. This was agreed.
The meeting ended at 4.54 p.m.
8
DRAFT Minutes of the Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
Virtual Attendees:
In Attendance:
held on Monday 23rd November, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
Councillors: D. Lyons & T. O'Flaherty
B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
Ms.
R. McNally, Deputy Chief Executive
. T. Prendergast, A/Director of Services
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. G. McMahon welcomed all to the meeting. He referred Councillors to copies of the draft
budget for their attention in advance of the Budget Meeting scheduled for Monday 30th
November 2020.
Mayor Cubbard referred to Agenda item 2(d) and asked Councillors if they wish to receive a
verbal report on the matter. Councillors discussed the matter and this was agreed. Queries and
clarification were received in the first instance.
2(d) Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004, Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) Bye-Laws No.
1 — 2020, Consideration of Report and Bye-laws for adoption
Clarification was sought in relation to remit that Councillors have to make amendments to the
draft bye-laws prior to adopting same.
Mr. U. Finn, S.E. clarified that these bye-laws are proposed under the Road Traffic Act 2004.
Unlike other bye-laws such as the busking bye-laws that are brought forward and considered
under the Local Government Act, the Local Government Act does provide for the making of the
bye-laws with such changes or amendments as considered by the local authority. Under the
Road Traffic Act 2004, the only provisions made are to adopt or reject the bye-laws. No
provision is made to amend the bye-laws. This is determined by legislation and it is not a policy
set by the executive of Galway City Council. The reason why the option to amend is not included
is likely as to the requirement that the bye-laws must be assessed to ensure that they are in
accordance with the Statutory Guidelines, they must be approved by Transport Infrastructure
Ireland and consultation is required with An Garda Siochéna and neighbouring local authorities.
Other queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included: public consultation,
submissions, increasing the maximum speed from 50 to 80 km/h on the N6 Bothar na dTreabh
and extending the 50 kilometre limit on the Letteragh and Ballagh road, special speed limits
9
during school hours with a reduction in schools zones, road safety, improved pedestrian
facilities, proposal of a minor amendment to part of the Dyke Road to a 30km zone, request for
a speed reduction in Clybaun and Ballymoneen road from the current 80 km limit, addition of
Ross Hill to speed increases, enforcement of parking and byelaws, parking on pavements by
speed vans, clarity on precise areas of 30km zones, signage, request for a report regarding
footpaths on Letteragh Road and discussion on other various roads in the city.
Of particular concern to a number of Councillors was the limitations of national legislation and
Government policy being cited as having no common sense.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed to reject outright the proposed byelaws. This was seconded by Cllr.
M.J. Crowe.
Cllr. N. Murphy proposed an amendment that Schedule 1, 2, 3 be rejected and accept changes
in Schedule 4. This was seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley.
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed the adoption the byelaws. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell who
requested that the motion include a review after 12 months. This was agreed by Cllr. E. Hoare
Mr. F. McEvoy responded to queries and clarifications raised and referred Councillors to a map
which was previously distributed to members. Mr. McEvoy put the map on a display screen and
outlined the proposed 30km/h for the inner-city areas — bounded by Lough Atalia Road, Fr
Griffin Road, St Mary's Road, Quincentenary Bridge and the Sean Mulvoy Road — though those
roads themselves will not be included in the proposed new limit.
Mr. U. Finn outlined that the proposed 2020 bye-laws also provide for rescinding the 2009 bye-
laws. The draft 2020 bye-laws are a very important bye-law as they provide for the basis for
which all future bye-laws will be based such as slow-zones, schools and feeder roads and as
outlined by Mr. F. McEvoy they provide the solid foundation for other bye-laws. The 2009 bye-
laws are also referenced to the 1987 Statutory Instrument and as such are many years out of
date and in urgent need of updating. It is also a direction of the Department of Transport to
carry out a full local authority review of bye-laws. If these bye-laws are rejected then the 2009
bye-laws remain in place.
Following clarification, Mayor Cubbard ruled Cllr. N. Murphy's amendment out of order and
Cllr. N. Murphy requested the withdrawal of the motion he submitted.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote. In line with Standing
Orders, the amendment shall be put first:
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'To propose adopting of the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) Bye-Laws No. 1-2020, as proposed
with a review after 12 months.'
In favour: Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis , Cllr. N.
Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr T. O'Flaherty
10
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins & Cllr. P. Keane.
In Favour: 8 Against: IO Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to read the original motion for a vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
'To propose reject outright the proposed Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) Bye-Laws No. 1-2020,
as a member of the Transportation Strategic Policy Committee.'
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Murphy &
Cllr. M. O'Connor.
Against: Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis & Cllr T.
O'Flaherty
In Favour: 12 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was passed.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. M. O'Connor and noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 14th September 2020 received from Sligo County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 16th September 2020 received from Meath County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 17th September 2020 received from Department of Housing,
Planning & Local Government
(d) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Department of Housing,
Planning & Local Government, Statement of Strategy 2021-2025
(e) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Department of Housing,
Planning & Local Government (adjustment to members' representational payment from 1
October 2020)
(f) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Kerry County Council
(g) Correspondence dated 29th September 2020 received from Louth County Council
(h) Correspondence dated 6th October 2020 received from Senator Robbie Gallagher
(i) Correspondence dated 28th October 2020 received from Minister Michael McGrath's office
in reply to NOM 54/2019
(j) Correspondence dated 21st October 2020 from Sarah Deignan, Galway Urban Greenway
Alliance regarding Proposed Cycleway for Salthill
(k) Correspondence dated 14th October 2020 from Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts,
Gaeltacht, Sport & Media (The Night-time Economy Stakeholder Consultation Process)
9. CONFERENCES
11
Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. M. O'Connor
and approved.
Training Educational Programme
Title: Advanced Diploma in Social Media & Media Law
Year: 2019 - 2020
Venue: King's Inns
Participant: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. M.
O'Connor.
Congratulations
Joe Biden, President-Elect of the United States
Kamala Harris, Vice President-Elect of the United States
Mervue United AFC
4(c) Chief Executive's Report: November 2020
Not Considered.
4(d) Quarterly Report, July to September 2020
(i) Transport & Infrastructure
(ii) Housing
(iii) Environment & Climate Change
(iv) Recreation & Amenity
(v) Economic Development & Culture
(vi) Community & Sports Development
Not Considered.
4(e) Water Framework Directive — Presentation on the EPA Water Quality Report
Not Considered.
12
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
NOM 8/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the
hospitality industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.'
NOM 19/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 24th September 2020
'That GCC call on the Government to extend the Rates Waiver for an additional six
months.'
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended
medals to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat
Quinlan recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have
yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to
make this a priority.'
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
NOM 22/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That an urgent safety assessment be carried out on Dominick Street and remedial works
be carried out to mitigate danger to the significantly increased number of residents,
particularly families with young children.'
13
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the
City that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday
to encourage people to come into the city.'
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines
for Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a
local ward will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area
committee, to enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate
at which that portion is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the
LPT variation rate is decided.'
NOM 28/2020
Submitted under SO 34 at the September Council Meeting. Request to leave on the
Agenda at the October Council meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That Galway City Council immediately move to implement the assurances given to the
Collins Family before, during and after the 'Kirwan Roundabout Part VIII Process'. These
assurances were given both publicly and privately. Despite this the family have largely been
ignored and this needs to be urgently addressed.'
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling
network across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle
network currently happening across the city'.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 04/2020
Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 31st October 2020
'As a consequence of the Government's decision to place the country under level 5
restrictions, the pool and gym at Leisureland are obliged to close. Can the council be
provided with a breakdown of the weekly running costs of Lesiureland during this period.'
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
15
