Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 9th December, 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, F.
Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, N. McNelis,
M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty and P. O'Reilly.
Apologies: Cllr. McDonnell
Connell, Deputy Chief Executive, Director of Services
Mr. T.
Ms.
R. McNally, Director of Services
N. Moggan A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. F. Kearney, Administrative Officer
A. Lyons, Administrative Officer
Mr
. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. T.
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Hynes, Financial Management Accountant
Ms. L.
Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent
Mr. S.
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms. G.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor proposed that a 15 minute break would be taken after item 2(c) and that the meeting would
conclude at 7.00pm. This was agreed by all members present.
Item 1 (a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 18th November 2019
The Mayor invited Matters of Accuracy, and Matters Arising on Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting
of Galway City Council, 18th November 2019. Two corrections submitted by Cllr. C. Connolly were noted
relating to the wording of motions submitted during the meeting and the Minutes are to be amended
accordingly.
Cllr. N. McNelis raised a matter of accuracy relating to the all-weather pitch in Cappagh, Knocknacarra and if
it is located in an area of Special Area of Conservation. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the Director of Services
prepare a report for the Council members to be presented in March on the all-weather pitch in Cappagh. This
was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
1
Director of Services prepare a report for the Council members to be presented in March on the all-weather
pitch in Cappagh.
Present: 16
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
The vote was noted.
A discussion on the removal of temporary lights from the all-weather pitch in Cappagh took place. Topics
discussed included correspondence from the National Parks and Wildlife Service regarding directional lighting
and issues relating to the Special Area of Conservation.
The Director of Services provided a comprehensive response to the issues raised. The Mayor then proposed
to suspend the Standing Orders to consider a motion received by Cllr. P. Keane under Standing Order 34.
The motion:
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To suspend Standing Orders to consider a motion received by Cllr. P. Keane under Section 34.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 16
The motion was passed.
A discussion took place with regard to the proposed motion, with issues regarding hours or usage and
charges; issuance of licences; a centralised booking system; floodlighting issues; Special Area of Conservation
at Cappagh Park; use of lights in Millar's Lane.
The Director of Service provided a comprehensive response to all the issues raised. He outlined that the local
authority had to conduct an Appropriate Assessment of the possible impact the lighting on an adjacent SAC.
This is not a requirement in Millar's Lane.
The Mayor then called a vote for the motion proposed by Cllr. P. Keane
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane
Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr.
N. Larkin, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. M. O'Connor, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. P. O'Reilly.
Motion — In the interests of fairness and equality, that henceforth and until Galway City Council is in a
position to fully implement a centralised Booking System for all Council owned facilities in Galway City,
that this Council resolves to offer the Licence of the Playing Pitches at Cappagh Park Knocknacarra on
similar terms, covenants and conditions as pertain to other Pitch Licences operating throughout the city
and specifically by particular reference to the Hours of Usage & the Charging Regime applied thereto.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The motion was passed.
Following the reinstating of Standing Orders, the meeting proceeded.
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 18th November, 2019 were agreed.
21 Page
Item 2 (a) Section 183 of the Local Government Act* 2001 — Disposal of
lands adjacent to Castlegar GAA Club
Members were requested to consider this Section 183 for approval. The request was discussed. Queries
raised by Councillors included the impact on any greenway; and what is the position with regard to the
ownership of the land and if it comes back into Council Ownership if there is bankruptcy.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne responded that there would be no impact on any proposed greenway. Mr. D. Mahon advised
that.a Section 183 disposal is a disposal of land for a particular purpose.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
To approval the disposal of land in the ownership of Galway City Council adjacent to Castlegar GAA Club
to Castlegar GAA Club.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The motion was passed.
Item 2 (b) Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 — Disposal of
lands by way of lease at Carnmore Co. Galway
Members were requested to consider this Section 183 for approval.
The request was discussed. Queries raised by Councillors included the potential for a lease for more than 1
year; the reason why the County Council were advising this lease was not going to be renewed after this year;
the reported move in the media of the fire services to the Carnmore site; an economic development plan for
the site;
Mr. D. Mahon responded to Councillors' queries comprehensively. He advised that the suggestion of a move
to build a fire station on the former airport site was not something that he was aware of though discussions
with the County Council did take place with regard to locations within the City Boundary for a new fire station.
Mr. T. Connell responded to Councillors that the request to renew the lease was an annual request that came
before Council. He advised that a feasibility study would take place in 2020 and that this would be brought
before the members to consider.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that the Galway Flying Club be consulted in relation to the feasibility study. This was
seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
That Galway Flying club be included in consultations in regards to the proposed feasibility study
on Galway Airport.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 16
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
3 IP age
To approve entering into a lease with Galway Flying Club for one year at the property formerly
known as Galway Airport, Carnmore, Co. Galway (details as set out in the Section 183 notice
circulated on 26/11/2019).
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 16
Item 2 (c) Draft West Regional Homeless Action Plan 2020-2022.
Mr. D. Mahon outlined that Galway City Council is the lead authority for the West Region Homeless
Management Group with Galway County, Mayo and Roscommon the other counties. The draft report was
presented to the Housing SPC which recommended that the report be brought before Council.
Ms. A. Lyons presented to Councillors on the Draft West Regional Homeless Action Plan 2020-2022.
Comments and questions from Members included: The increase in the numbers presenting as homeless; the
difficulty of sourcing direct provision facilities; the length of time people are spending in homeless services;
the cost to the local authority if 90% of the funding is from government how is the other 10% spread among
the other Councils; whether any council staff are involved in the COPE outreach team; the appointment of
short term letting staff; advocate for improvements in National policy; traveller accommodation; the reasons
why landlords are exiting; the need to build public houses on publically owned lands; the role Threshold has
in dealing with notices to quit; the lack of elected members on the Housing Task Force; the lack of drug and
alcohol support services in Galway; the wrap around service; the opening of the family hub in Westside; the
turnaround on long term voids; housing requirements of elderly men; rough sleeping support; universal
design for individuals with a disability; housing in Ballybane and Castlepark; social housing from Crown Plaza
site; policy of offering 1 bed units.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to the comments and questions. Mr. D. Mahon advised that the
Council is dealing with the housing crisis by managing the funding and driving forward a capital programme.
The Traveller Accommodation Programme has a range of capital build initiatives that will be brought before
the members. He informed the members that any funding that was requested from the Department of
Housing and Local Government has been provided. The funding of €10,000,000 is 90% funded by the
Department with the Council funding the majority of the remainder of the 10% due to it being the area with
the biggest number of homelessness. The Council in collaboration with Cope is looking at the feasibility of a
new hostel. Families in hubs and emergency accommodation are supported by the outreach team to exit the
homeless services and are provided with social housing from the City Council, AHB, HAP or private rental
accommodation. He also advised that the minutes and reports from the Housing Taskforce will be made
available to elected representatives. Threshold plays a role in the prevention of individuals entering into
homelessness. It checks the validity of the notices to quit and it can negotiate on behalf of the tenant
regarding the tenancy. It also offers other supports to individuals. It has prevented people becoming
homeless. The plan also develops this support further. The modular housing scheme will be available in
January and will be run by the Peter McVerry Trust and those to be allocated will come from those currently
in Private Emergency Accommodation. He also advised that all rough sleepers have been offered support by
the outreach team but that not all individual engage with the services.
Mr. D. Mahon further informed members that proposals to deal with long term voids in Sliabh Bån and Féna
Glas will be presented to members in 2020. The Council policy is to provide and build 2 bed units however,
some 1 bed units are required. All houses are designed in adherence to Part M of the Building Regulations
41 Page
some 1 bed units are required. All houses are designed in adherence to Part M of the Building Regulations
which deals with accessibility and also at design stage for elderly persons. Merlin can accommodate up to
120 housing units which will be affordable. A Part 8 will be presented to the Council. Ballybane will have
contractors appointed in January 2020. The Crown site has a Part 5 requirement which is 10% available for
social housing.
The Mayor then took a vote on the adoption of the Draft West Region Homeless Action Plan 2020-2022.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2 (c) adoption of the Draft West Regional Homeless Action Plan 2020-2022.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. O. Hanley proposed a motion of no confidence in in the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local
Government Eoghan Murphy. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
A discussion took place with regard to the motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Galway City Council expresses No confidence in the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government
Eoghan Murphy
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr M. O'Connor, Cllr. P.
O'Reilly
Against: Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr.
E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In favour: 6 Against: 11 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was defeated.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a motion that Galway City Council calls on the government to recognise housing
as a human right and to enshrine the right to Housing in the Irish Constitution. This was seconded by Cllr. P.
O'Reilly.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported: Cllr. O. Hanley and Cllr. N. McNelis
That Galway City Council calls on the government to recognise housing as a human right and to enshrine
the right to housing in the Irish Constitution.
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr M. O'Connor, Cllr. P.
O'Reilly
Against: Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr.
E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In favour: 6 Against: 11 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was defeated.
51 Page
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a motion that GCC condemns the failure of Rebuilding Ireland to deliver housing,
both social and affordable and that resources be placed primarily with the Local Authorities to deliver social
and affordable housing on public lands. This was seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
That GCC condemns the failure of Rebuilding Ireland to deliver housing, both social and affordable and
that resources be placed primarily with the Local Authorities to deliver social and affordable housing on
public lands.
In favour: Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M.
Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. M. O'Connor, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty,
Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Against: Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C, Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. N. Larkin,
In favour: 13 Against: 4 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a motion that GCC calls on the Government to provide the financial resources
necessary to provide adequate housing accommodation units for:
• People with disabilities
• People with addictions
• Elderly people
• Women and men suffering from domestic violence
And to provide the financial resources necessary to provide adequate step-down accommodation units, with
accompanying services in collaboration with the HSE and relevant authorities for:
People with addictions
This was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
That GCC calls on the Government to provide the financial resources necessary to provide adequate
housing accommodation units for:
• People with disabilities
People with addictions
Elderly people
• Women and men suffering from domestic violence
And to provide the financial resources necessary to provide adequate step-down accommodation units,
with accompanying services in collaboration with the HSE and relevant authorities for:
• People with addictions
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr M. O'Connor, Cllr. P.
O'Reilly
Against: Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr.
E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In favour: 6 Against: 11 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was defeated.
61 Page
Item 2 (d) Three Year Capital Programme
This item was noted.
Item 2 (e) Corporate Plan 2019 - 2024
Deputy Chief Executive Mr. T. Connell requested an extension to bring the plan to the Council members at
the March meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That the Corporate Plan be presented to members at the March Council Meeting.
All agreed.
Item 2 (f) Galway Harbour Company — Due Diligence in context of National
Ports Policy and the Harbours Act 2015
Deputy Chief Executive Mr. T. Connell requested that this item was deferred to the January agenda.
All agreed.
It was then proposed by the Mayor to take the following motion, proposed by Cllr. Fahy, under Standing
Order 34. This was agreed by all.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Supported by: Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. A.
Cheevers, Cllr. P. O'Reilly, Cllr. M. O'Connor, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. O. Hanley,
Cllr. N. McNelis
Considering the unanimous motion passed in Dåil Eireann on the 19th November 2019, this Local
Authority recognises:
In March 2018 Ireland formally ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities
(UNCRPD), which under Article 19 states that disabled people have the right to live in the community
and have access to a range of in-home and other supports including PAS to support this.
Its obligation to consult closely with disabled people and their representative organisations in policy
development as enshrined in Article 4.3 of the UNCRPD which states that "in the development and
implementation of legislation and policies...States Parties shall closely consult with and actively involve
persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their representative
organizations", specifically in relation to services provided by this local authority which impact on
disabled people's lives, such as planning, housing, transport, social inclusion and enterprise.
The Motion passed in Dåil Eireann on the 19th November and as such reaffirms that PAS that supports
disabled people to live independent lives should be legislated for as a right.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
71 Page
Motion 67/2019 proposed by Cllr. C. Higgins and seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare was then taken.
NOM 67/2019
Proposed: Cllr. C. Higgins
Seconded: Cllr. E. Hoare
Galway City Council commits to exploring the possibility of a feasibility study to provide for a Changing
Places Accessible Facility in the City. Standard disabled accessible toilets do not meet the needs of all
people with complex disabilities thus enhancing the dignity of someone who may need extra support and
additional equipment during personal care tasks needs to be considered
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Motion 50/2019 proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe and seconded by Cllr. J. Connolly was then taken.
NOM 50/2019
Proposed : Cllr. O. Crowe
Seconded: Cllr. J. Connolly
That Clamping & more severe penalties be introduced on to people that infringe, Park or block Disabled
parking spaces across our City.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 17
Item 4 (a) All Ireland Pollinator Plan.
Mr. S. Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent, presented on the All Ireland Pollinator Plan.
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
That Galway City Council adopt the All Ireland Pollinator Plan.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor agreed to take the following two motions from the floor:
Seconded by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
With growing concerns within many business and community groups in terms of insurance cover, this
council urges Minister Michael D'Arcy to fast track insurance reform in Ireland as difficulties in getting
adequate insurance cover and unsustainable levels of premium are threatening the immediate future of
many organisations.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
81 Page
Present: 17
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
I propose that the executive present an urgent update to the city council meeting in January regarding the
potential return to Galway and restoration of Naomh Eanna ship as a tourist attraction.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed a motion in relation to insurance for community-based organisations and Irish
Public Bodies. It was agreed that the item be deferred to be considered at the January meeting.
4.
(b)
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Galway City European Green Leaf 2017 Final Report — Copy attached.
Chief Executive's Report
November 2019 - Noted
ii.
91 Page
December 2019 — Circulated December 2019.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty,
D. Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of
civil society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. Motion to remain on the Agenda.
NOM 19/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning,
Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
• Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
• Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority Area
for the display of authorised election material
• That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
• That all election candidates be given equal space for display
• That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down
by law
Not considered.
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund scheme
specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
Not considered.
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force personnel.
Not considered.
10 | Page
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her Department
acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their personal
information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal autonomy rights
of other citizens in Ireland.
Not considered.
NOM 37/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 1st July 2019
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to deliver on a 2008 Labour Court ruling to provide
pension entitlement to supervisors on Community Employment schemes in the state. The Government's
inaction on the 2008 decision is totally undermining the Labour Court and causing undue hardship to
supervisors that made no alternative arrangements on foot of this historical Court decision.
Not considered.
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
'Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020 marking the
centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred in Galway during 1920
including but not exclusive to:
The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke in
September 1920.
The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces."
Not considered.
NOM 43/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and the Minister of
State for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special responsibility for Equality,
Immigration and Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the closure of all Galway based Direct
Provision Centres and instead, offer residents suitable, community-based accommodation and services
for children and families.
Not considered.
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries warning about
the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure to electromagnetic
radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on Comm Re to den licensing for its roll-out and
11 Page
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a working group
to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and human health due to the
current questionable scientific knowledge. "
Not considered.
NOM 46/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd September 2019
I call on this council to either cut back or remove overgrown trees that are blocking road signs throughout
the city boundary.
Not considered.
NOM 47/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 3rd September 2019
That this Council create a study to investigate future pedestrianisation of streets located in the city centre
core. This study will be presented to elected members and would specifically recommend which streets
would be most favourable to pedestrianisation by taking into account factors including but not limited
to: condition of street as exists, impacts on footfall, future transportation plans, accessibility access, the
amount of local residents and businesses that would need to be consulted with, benefits of
pedestrianisation for area.
Not considered.
NOM deferred from Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 23rd September 2019
NOM 53/2019
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that this council seek funding from the NTA to remove the Skerrit Roundabout and to replace
it with traffic lights.
Not considered.
NOM 54/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th October 2019
This local authority write to Paschal Donohoe T.D, Minister for Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform
stating that "Eurostat has confirmed that the Northern and Western Region, which includes our local
authority, has moved back from a 'Developed Region' to 'Region in Transition and considering that this
points to a two speed national economy, how is the Minister proposing to address it; is there opportunity
for positive discrimination? Can the Minister also confirm that European Regional Development Funding
will continue to be delivered in the regions post 2020?
Not considered.
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals etc. and all
workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
Not considered.
121 Page
NOM 61/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 25th October 2019
I am calling on Galway City Council in conjunction with Galway County Council to look at a pilot scheme
for a park and ride from Galway airport facility to service Parkmore and city for Galway commuters.
Not considered.
NOM 63/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 11th November 2019
That Galway City Council would allocate 10% of its Transport Budget to Cycling
Not considered.
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising meetings to
combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective actions that could be
taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib
Not considered.
NOM 65/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 21st November 2019
That the Transport Department follow-up with recent comments by Minister for Transport Shane Ross
that funding will be made available for bicycle traffic lights to Local Authorities and that were possible
Galway City Council will incorporate bicycle traffic lights as a core planning element of cycling
infrastructure as it exists as well as with the future rollout of cycle lanes
Not considered.
NOM 66/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 27th November 2019
Galway City Council will organise a designated member of staff to act as a liaison officer with the traders
committee on market issues at St. Nicholas Market
Not considered.
NOM 68/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd December 2019
I call on Galway City Council to introduce a 30KM speed limit throughout all of the residential estates
within the City Boundary
Not considered.
6. QUESTIONS
No questions
13
CORRESPONDENCE
7.
None
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
8.
None
CONFERENCES
9.
Conferences were proposed by Cllr. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. Fahy and approved.
(a) Title: Housing Conference 2019
Date: 3rd December 2019
RETROSPECTIVE
Venue: Radisson Blu Royal Hotel, Golden Lane, Dublin
(b) Title: The Finance Act 2019
Date: 10th, 11th & 12th January 2020
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
(c) Title: Tackling Carbon Emissions & Fuel Poverty
Date: 24th, 25th & 26th January 2020
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Item 10 — Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. McNelis and seconded by Cllr.
Lyons as follows:
Sympathies
• Dan Blake, R.I.P.
• Paul O'Neill, R.I.P.
• Phil Leonard, R.I.P.
• Winnie Coyne, R.I.P.
Congratulations
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
None
The Mayor wished all Councillors and staff a Happy Christmas and concluded the meeting at 7.00pm.
14 | P age
& Signed
ayor o alway