Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 10th February, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty and P. O' Reilly.
Apologies: F. Fahy
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Kearney, Administrative Officer
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Philbin, Chief Executive, Galway 2020
Mr. T.
Mr. G.
Ms. F.
Ms. G.
MS. p.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection. The Mayor welcomed all
attendees and acknowledged the Council members who stood in the general election.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed the deferral of item 2(a). This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and
agreed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Galway European Capital of Culture 2020
As agreed at the Special Meeting of the 27 January 2020 this item was considered first. The
Meetings Administrator provided further advice on the issue of a potential conflict of interest
relating to the Mayor and his position as a Director of the Board of Galway 2020. He referred to
Section 176 of the Local Government Act 2001 which relates to "Beneficial" Interests. He advised
that this could also have an impact on the nomination of Councillors by Galway City Council to
other outside bodies.
Following Councillor queries, Mr. B. McGrath advised he had requested that the Meetings
Administrator get further advice on the issue.
1
Cllr. M. Cubbard declared that he has an interest in Galway 2020 but that it is not a beneficial
interest. He will chair the meeting but not take part in any vote.
A discussion followed on the request to provide further funding to Galway 2020. Queries and
concerns were raised from the elected members including: budgets, expenditure, the monitoring
committee, the opening ceremony, staffing costs and legacy of Galway 2020.
Ms. P. Philbin, Chief Executive, Galway 2020 and Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive provided
comprehensive responses to queries and concerns raised. Ms. P. Philbin provided further
clarification on support from other organisations including Galway and Roscommon Education and
Training Board, Northern Western Regional Assembly, Western Development Commission,
National University of Ireland, Galway, TG4, EU Funding, Fåilte Ireland, RTÉ and Culture Ireland.
Further clarifications and comments from the elected members included: funding from Galway
City Council; salary support being sought; breakdown for extra programming; details of
professional fees; booking systems and funding of programmes announced.
Ms. P. Philbin and Mr. B. McGrath provided comprehensive responses to the clarifications and
comments.
Cllr. M. Cubbard removed himself from the Chair and Cllr. D. Lyons, Deputy Mayo, took the chair.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a motion that GCC does not allocate an additional €2.5 million to Galway
2020 as recommended by the Chief Executive. This was seconded by Cllr. P. Keane.
A roll call voted was proposed by Cllr. O. Hanley and this was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly and Cllr.
N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr P. Keane
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
That GCC does not allocate an additional €2.5 million to Galway 2020 as
recommended by the Chief Executive.
In favour: Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr J. Connolly, Cllr. MJ Crowe, Cllr. O.
Crowe, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr P. Keane, Cllr. M. O'Connor,
Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Against: Cllr N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr D. McDonnell, Cllr N. McNelis, Cllr T.
O'Flaherty
Present: 16
In favour: 11 Against: 5 Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
At 17.22 Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the meeting be adjourned for 15 minutes and reconvene and
17:40. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly, and agreed. The meeting reconvened at 17:57 with
the Mayor as chair.
21 Page
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 20th January 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to Adopt Item 1 (a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 20th
January 2020
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Draft Minutes were Adopted.
Matters raised included the circulation of the report on Hynes' Yard item 2(d); an update on the
future licence of Cappagh Park for the March meeting; the motion passed in the December Council
meeting relating to Knocknacarra FC.
Clarification was provided by the Chief Executive that the booking system for Cappagh Park is a
requirement of the Sports Capital Funding regarding the availability of the facilities to all sports; the
implementation of the booking system is an executive function and this is being rolled out to all
other pitches across the City.
Cllr. P. Keane requested that a report be brought to the April meeting identifying all the pitches that
will be brought under the booking system. Cllr. D. McDonnell requested that the report note how
the booking of pitches be monitored.
Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 27th January 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to Adopt Item 1 (a) — Draft Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 27th
January 2020
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
The Draft Minutes were Adopted.
Present: 17
A matter of accuracy was raised by Cllr. C. Connolly regarding the minutes of the meeting not noting
that the Chief Executive raised an issue after the meeting had adjourned and would like this to be
included.
31 Page
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(b) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2020
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the Annual Service Delivery Plan be noted. This was seconded by Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that the Annual Service Delivery Plan be discussed by the members. This
was seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Motion to discuss the Annual Service Delivery Plan.
In favour: 4 Against: 13 Abstain: O
Present: 17
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to Note the Annual Service Delivery Plan.
In favour: 13 Against: 4 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Annual Service Delivery Plan was noted.
(c) Galway Harbour Company - Due Diligence in context of National Ports Policy and the Harbours
Act, 2015
The Chief Executive provided an overview of the due diligence report as issued to the elected
members. He explained the two options that were available to Galway City Council in relation to the
Galway Harbour Company. The first one suggests the transfer of the shareholding to Galway City
Council and the second involves the dissolution of the Harbour Company with the vesting of
operations in the local authority.
Queries and concerns from the elected members included: clarification on the two options; the need
for a holistic development plan for the inner harbour; the sale of land by the board; the directorship
of the Harbour Company; the development of the port to a Tier 1 or Tier 2 designated port and the
current status of proposed planning at the docks.
Cllr. P. Keane proposed that the consultants who wrote the due diligence report present to the
Councillors on what is in the Council's best interest. This was seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe.
Mr. B. McGrath provided comprehensive responses to the queries and concerns. He advised that
the consultants will be contacted to establish if they will provide a workshop for Councillors.
(d) Proposed disposal of the Freehold Title on 28 — 32 Shop Street, Galway
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, provided an overview of the disposal of the freehold title.
4 IP age
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed the disposal of the Freehold title on 28-32 Shop Street. This was seconded
by Cllr. P. Keane
Queries and concerns from the elected members included: the difference in pricing for the disposal
of recreation and amenity land and this land; the number of 99 year leases the Council has issued.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. P. Keane
Motion to propose the disposal of the freehold title on 28-32 Shop Street, Galway.
In favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: O
Present: 15
The motion was passed
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b) Galway City European Green Leaf 2017 Final Report
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To note the Galway City European Green Leaf 2017 Final Report.
In favour: 12 Against: 2 Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was assed.
(d) Chief Executive's Report
1. January 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To consider Item 4.18 of the Chief Executive's Report and note the rest of the report.
In favour: 13 Against: 1 Abstain: O
Present: 14
The motion was passed.
A discussion took place with regard to the proposal. Queries and comments in relation to the
proposal included: promotion of the city by the world wide screening of the production; the great
work Druid do promoting the city; the policy and rules around the marketing and promotion fund
for the City and the need for this and the sinking fund to be reviewed.
The Chief Executive provided a comprehensive response and advised the members that new
proposals regarding the marketing fund will be brought to the CPG and then to Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To provide funding of €80,000 for the World Wide streaming of the Druid Production of The Cherry
Orchard.
51 Page
A proposal to add to the motion was made by Cllr. P. Keane and this was accepted.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane
Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
To provide the funding of €80,000 for the World Wide Streaming of the Druid Production of the
Cherry Orchard from the 2020 marketing fund allocation.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The motion passed.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Filling of Vacancy on a Committee or Approved Body - Northern and Western Regional Assembly -
following the resignation of Cllr. Declan McDonnell - Deferred
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
NONE
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(c) Quarterly Report, October to December 2019 - Not Considered.
ii.
v.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
(d) Chief Executive's Report
2. February 2020 - Not Considered
61 Page
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty,
D. Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of civil
society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. Motion to remain on the Agenda.
NOM 19/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning,
Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority Area
for the display of authorised election material
That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
That all election candidates be given equal space for display
That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down
by law
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund scheme
specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
NOM 26/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force personnel.
71 Page
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her
Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their
personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal
autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
NOM 41/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020 marking the
centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred in Galway during 1920
including but not exclusive to:
The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke in
September 1920.
The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Bri ade of the Republican Forces."
NOM 43/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and the Minister
of State for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special responsibility for Equality,
Immigration and Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the closure of all Galway based Direct
Provision Centres and instead, offer residents suitable, community-based accommodation and services
for children and families.
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries warning about
the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure to electromagnetic
radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on Comm Reg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a working
group to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and human health due to
the current questionable scientific knowled e."
NOM 46/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd September 2019
I call on this council to either cut back or remove overgrown trees that are blocking road signs
throughout the city boundary.
Response issued with Agenda 05th Februa 2020.
81 Page
NOM 47/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 3rd September 2019
That this Council create a study to investigate future pedestrianisation of streets located in the city
centre core. This study will be presented to elected members and would specifically recommend which
streets would be most favourable to pedestrianisation by taking into account factors including but not
limited to: condition of street as exists, impacts on footfall, future transportation plans, accessibility
access, the amount of local residents and businesses that would need to be consulted with, benefits of
pedestrianisation for area.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM deferred from Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 23rd September 2019
NOM 53/2019
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that this Council seek funding from the NTA to remove the Skerrit Roundabout and to replace
it with traffic lights.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM 54/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th October 2019
This local authority write to Paschal Donohoe T.D, Minister for Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform
stating that "Eurostat has confirmed that the Northern and Western Region, which includes our local
authority, has moved back from a 'Developed Region' to 'Region in Transition and considering that this
points to a two speed national economy, how is the Minister proposing to address it; is there opportunity
for positive discrimination? Can the Minister also confirm that European Regional Development Funding
will continue to be delivered in the regions post 2020?
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals etc. and all
workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
NOM 61/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 25th October 2019
I am calling on Galway City Council in conjunction with Galway County Council to look at a pilot scheme
for a park and ride from Galway airport facility to service Parkmore and city for Galway commuters.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM 63/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 11th November 2019
That Galway City Council would allocate 10% of its Tra nsport Budget to Cycling.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
91 Page
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising meetings to
combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective actions that could be
taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib
NOM 66/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 27th November 2019
Galway City Council will organise a designated member of staff to act as a liaison officer with the traders
committee on market issues at St. Nicholas Market
NOM 68/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd December 2019
I call on Galway City Council to introduce a 30KM speed limit throughout all of the residential estates
within the City Boundary
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM 69/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th December 2019
Galway City Council calls to expand the remit of IPB Insurance to provide public liability insurance, at an
affordable rate, to community events and festivals that are otherwise unable to source affordable
insurance. We also call on other local authorities, Regional Assemblies and ETBs to also ask for this
motion to be supported.
NOM 70/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 17th December 2019
I'm calling on Galway City Council Executive to implement a Seven day Maintenance contract for traffic
lights management right across Galway City.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM 71/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 17th December 2019
I'm calling on transportation section of Galway City Council to carry out a full audit on all disabled spaces
including spaces that are not clearly identified with partial marking as these required to brought up to
the recognised standard. I want the audit to include accessibility & suitability for disabled permit holders.
Response issued with Agenda 05th February 2020.
NOM 03/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 13th January 2020
That Galway City Council engage and consult with the National Transport Authority with a view to
amending the existing 404 route from Westside to Oranmore. The proposed amendments to the existing
route have been forwarded to Galway City Council for consideration.
IO I Page
NOM 0412020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
Date Received: 14th January 2020
I request as a matter of urgency that street lighting be installed along by the plots, behind the Waterside,
west of the Dyke Road. Galway City Council operate a paid parking system in that space but no lighting
is provided. During a town hall show patrons had their tax and insurance discs stolen from their car
which had been parked in this area in daylight, on return they report the area was in complete darkness.
NOM 05/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 27th January 2020
That Galway City Council call on the Minister with responsibilities for local government to hold a
plebiscite vote on a proposal for a directly elected Mayor with executive functions.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/2020
Question given by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Date Received: 13th January 2020
Following a commitment given at a meeting I organised with Deputy Noel Grealjsh on July 24, 2014 —
attended by Mr. Ray O' Dwyer, Head of Operations for Irish Water; Mr. Tim O' Connor, Irish Water;
Galway City Council Chief Executive Mr. Brendan McGrath; former Head of Finance Ms. Edel McCormack;
and former Senior Engineer Mr. Ray Brennan
— that the bathing water in Ballyloughane would be
prioritised, and that remedial works would be carried out to bring the water up to an acceptable
standard, I am now requesting a full report on the issue. I request a detailed report on all remedial works
carried out by Irish Water and Galway City Council, and also the costs involved in carrying out these
works. I am also seeking details of any further remedial works that may be necessary, and a commitment
that any such works will be carried out as a matter of urgency.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Northern & Western Regional Assembly -A Region in Transition - The Way Forward Report
with cover letter dated 29 January 2020 — Copy attached.
(b) Extension of public consultation phase on new National Policy on Architecture with cover
letter dated 3rd February 2020 — Copy attached.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None
Mi
s, Con.
May(
ed & Signed
, (Yüvray
Ill Page
9. CONFERENCES
item 9 — Conferences were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell as
follows:
(a) Title: Celtic Conferences — Regional Development and EU Cohesion Policy beyond 2020
Date: 20th, 21st & 22nd March 2020
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
(b) Title: Celtic Conferences —Tourism Technology & Competitive Strategies
Date: 27th 28th & 29th March 2020
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. N. McNelis
Approved Training
(c) Title: AILG Annual Training Conference 2020
Date:4th & 5th March 2020
Venue: The Longford Arms Hotel & Spa, Main Street, Longford
The following Councillor's were approved to attend: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty, Cllr. D.
McDonnell, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. Niall McNelis & Cllr. P. O'Reilly
(d) Title: LAMA Spring Training Seminar
Date: 12th & 13th March 2020
Venue: Sligo Park Hotel
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Item IO — Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell as follows:
Sympathies
Helen Rooney, R.I.P.
Sonny O'Halloran, R.I.P.
Pat McCann, R.I.P.
Nancy O'Neill, R.I.P.
Mrs. McGrath, R.I.P.
Tom Forde, R.I.P.
Durkan Forde, R.I.P.
Congratulations
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting cbncluded at 7.28 pm.
12 | Page