Minutes of the Ordinary May Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 10th May, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors:, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. l.
Byrne
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr.
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
M. Harrington, Executive Planner
Ms.
K. Moloney, Assistant Planner
Ms.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Mr. J.
R. O'Reilly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
P. Batty, Executive Engineer
C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms.
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
J. Harrold, Arts Officer
Mr.
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting
and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the
agreed protocol for meetings. He advised that recording/rebroadcasting of audio or images is
prohibited.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting and expressed sympathies on behalf of himself and
the Council to Mr. Declan Smyth, Head of Finance on the passing of his mother Sadie Smyth, RIP.
Mayor Cubbard invited matters of accuracy/matters arising regarding Item I(a).
ayor of
Signd
alway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th April 2021 and adjournment meeting held on
26th April 2021
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administration referred to the Council adjournment meeting held on
26th April 2021 and to the Motion on PIO of the draft minutes 'To support the executive in exploring
the development of Leisureland and Salthill Park as a possible combined development'. He
confirmed that the Vote was: In favour: 16 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 17. This was noted.
Matters Arising
Cllr. O'Flaherty referred to Item No. 2(b) - Annual Financial Statement for year ending 31st December
2020 and queried if the City Council provides funding towards Rinville Park and cemetery in
Oranmore.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
(b) Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th April 2021 and
adjournment meeting held on 26th April 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor Cubbard invited matters of accuracy/ matters arising regarding agenda item I(b):
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 19th April 2021
Matters of Accuracy
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty referred to a matter of accuracy regarding names listed on a roll call vote on the
second Motion on page 2 of the draft minutes. She advised that she voted in favour and Cllr. M.
O'Connor voted against this Motion. This was noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Motion to Adopt Item I(b) — Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 19th April
2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Cllr. C. Connolly said that she supported outdoor dining but referred to the issue of drinking in public
places and her belief that there was an unacceptable extension of drinking into the public realm.
She advised that there is a requirement for public toilet facilities and not portaloos in the city. She
proposed the convening of an urgent meeting of all three Area Committees and if a member An
Garda Siochåna could be invited to the meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
The Chief Executive expressed the Council's support for outdoor dining and confirmed that Galway
City has Byelaws regarding the Regulation & Control of the Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor.
However, he confirmed that the City Council does not have functions regarding the sale of alcohol
2
or under the Intoxicating Liquor Act. He confirmed that a majority of Councillors had requested
temporary toilet facilities in the city.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services referred Councillors to the May Chief Executive's Report
advising that it includes an update on temporary toilet facilities; Automatic Public Conveniences
(APC); tender requests and a review to be conducted on the need for facilities. He advised that a
report on existing APCs in the city and future plans will be provided at the May Environment SPC
meeting.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services gave an update on funding for businesses for outdoor dining
at suitable locations and confirmed that a report is being prepared for the Strategic Policy
Committee.
Councillor Crowe queried the purpose of Cllr. C. ConnollVs Motion for a meeting. He expressed his
confidence in An Garda Siochåna in carrying out their functions and expressed his support for
outdoor dining.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested through the Mayor that Cllr. M.J. Crowe withdraw remarks made 'That
Cllr. Connolly has no appreciation of what hospitality has gone through'
Cllr. Crowe declined to withdraw remarks.
Councillors discussed the Motion and generally welcomed the current measures introduced by the
Council. Other matters raised included the request for a response to queries on casual trading and
tourism initiatives and that the matter of public drinking be referred to the Joint Policing Committee.
Cllr. P. Keane referred to the Galway City Regulation & Control of the Consumption of Intoxicating
Liquor Byelaws and requested that part 4 of the legislation be invoked to allow for the relaxing of
provisions of the Byelaws in certain designated areas.
Following discussion, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty withdrew her seconding of the Motion and advised that she
supported outdoor dining. This was noted.
The Chief Executive confirmed that an update will be given on the matter at the June Ordinary
Council meeting.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Draft Annual Report 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Motion to Adopt Item 2(a) — Draft Annual Report 2020
This was agreed and the Annual Report was adopted.
3
2(b) To Consider the Chief Executive's Report on the Public Consultation in relation to the Issues
Paper to inform the preparation of the Draft Galway City Development Plan 2023 - 2029.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that agenda item 2(b) be deferred. He advised that it was agreed at the
Corporate Policy Group meeting held on the 6th May that a Procedures meeting will be arranged
before the end of May to agree on a format/timetabling of meetings to consider agenda item 2(b)
for approval by the full Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To defer agenda item 2(b).
This was agreed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Draft minutes of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Thursday 6th May 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
To note the draft minutes of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Thursday 6th May 2021.
This was agreed and the draft minutes were noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Government policy paper in relation to Irish Water.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive summarised the content of the Government policy paper in relation to
Irish Water which included: Government vision; Programme for Government; the Water Sector
Transformation Process and the move towards an Integrated Public Water Services Utility. He
confirmed that the LGMA will make a submission to the Department on concerns regarding proposed
policies relating to Irish Water. He confirmed that the current Service Level Agreement between
Galway City Council and Irish Water is until 2024.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services referred to the potential loss of skillsets if staff transfer to a
public water services utility. He advised that under the policy paper the City Council will not be an
operating partner in the Water services sector but would retain responsibility for surface water
management.
Councillors discussed the policy paper and concerns raised included the role and remit of Councillors
into the future in the water services sector; democratic deficit and the voice of the public in any new
utility; mechanism for Elected Members to engage; Ardaun and Mutton Island capacity and if a
requirement for a pump house and query regarding any compensation for loss of services.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised.
4
4(b) i. Update re COVID 19 "The Path Ahead" - Covid 19 Resilience and Recovery
ii. Update regarding new public health measures: "The Path Ahead" May 2021
Councillors noted 4(b)(i) and 4(ii). The Chief Executive gave an update to Councillors regarding new
public health measures in May 2021.
Councillors raised the following individual matters: when could Council meetings be held in a physical
space and elected members return to City Hall; request for a summary of business supports currently
available including from the Local Enterprise Office; query regarding staff that are not vaccinated and
if they will be allowed to travel/work together; compliments to Council staff particularly the
Environment litter management staff on the work done during the pandemic; thanks to the
Community Call and Forum; query when parklets will be delivered; re-opening of night life economy;
query re: non-compliance of Air B&Bs; query regarding demolition and update regarding demolition
of the former Corrib Great Southern; backlog in grants due to restrictions on house visits; rates
incurred due to delay in selling property; customer service and opening of public buildings for toilet
facilities; parking policy; events and general queries regarding the May public health measures.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services confirmed that he will circulate a list of supports available to
businesses to Councillors and advised that these supports are continually publicised by the Council.
He advised the Council that to assist in restarting the economy a programme of events in the city is
being compiled. He referred to a bookings system for entry to the Galway City Council Museum due
to restricted numbers capacity in the building and advised that temporary toilets are located nearby
for use by the general public.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator; Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services, Mr. U. Finn,
A/Director of Services and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised, as appropriate.
Mayor Cubbard requested that a Motion he proposed under Standing Order 34 for the purpose of
dealing with urgent business be considered. This was agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Supported by: Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr.
N. McNelis; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
"Following a discussion around fencing to protect a number of public playing pitches
citywide at a Recreation & Amenity SPC meeting in 2020, no further update has come before
Galway City Council.
A number of playing pitches are in urgent need of fencing to be erected in order to protect
them from large animals, dog faeces continuously left where young children train and
damage caused due to scrambler bikes.
Therefore, I am requesting that said SPC make such policy a priority and revert back to full
council after their next meeting with a view to introducing a policy to allow for fencing which
will continue to give access to all in the community but offer protection from the above".
This was approved.
5
Cllr. A. Cheevers commended Council staff, however, he said that there was a failure on Parks staff
who refuse to engage with Sports Clubs in the city. When requested to withdraw remarks, Cllr.
Cheevers declined.
4(j) Amenity Grants 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Motion to note 4(j) Amenity Grants Reports 2021.
This was agreed and the Report was noted.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed a Vote of Congratulations to Cllr. D. Lyons on his recent retirement.
Councillors extended their best wishes to Cllr. Lyons.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Agenda Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations be approved.
This was agreed.
Votes of Sympathy
Mary Duffy R.I.P.
Tony Heneghan R.I.P.
• Brid Howard R.I.P.
Mayor Cubbard proposed the noting of 4(c) and 4(d). This was agreed.
4(c) Galway City Council Community Department:
o Galway City COVID-19 Community Response Forum
o NESC Review of Community Call
Noted.
4(d) National Development Plan, Review to Renew — Submission made by Galway City Council
on 28th January 2021
Noted.
The meeting ended at 16:55p.m.
6
DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary May Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 24th May, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Cllr.
N. Larkin
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Ms. H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. T.
Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Mr. J.
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
R. O'Reilly, Senior Executive Engineer
D. Redington, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
P. O'Grady, Assistant Engineer
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Mr. D. Fallon, OPW
Mr. J. Kelly, OPW
Ms. E. Kennedy, ARUP
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the adjourned Council meeting. He proposed the following running
order: 4(f) Arts Strategy followed by 2(b) CE Report on City Development Plan; 4(e) Chief Executive's
Reports April & May; 4(i) Coirib go C6sta - Flood Relief scheme consultation followed by any other
item in order of agenda for which time allows.
4(f) Galway City Council Arts Strategy 2021 - 2026 & Arts Action Plan 2021 - 2024
Mayor Cubbard proposed that the document be taken as read and invited comments from
Councillors:
7
Councillors welcomed the Strategy and Action Plan and matters raised included: welcome of
inclusivity in the documents; query on baseline data for underrepresented groups; how impact and
outcomes in terms of meeting objectives will be measured; the need for outdoor spaces;
performance and dance facilities; queries on the % for Art Scheme and if there was a budget for the
upkeep of public art; the need for facilities for film industry; artists in schools; the need to support
professional individual artists as a profession; open events and development of micro cultures and
art; amalgamation and to consider the needs of residents in the city when creating spaces.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to adopt 4(f) Galway City Council Arts Strategy 2021-2026 & Arts Action Plan 2021
This was agreed and the Strategy and Plan were adopted.
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer informed Councillors of research conducted and responded to queries
raised. He confirmed that he will arrange for a copy of proposed % for Art projects to be issued to
Councillors. He thanked the work of Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive, B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
and Ms. M. McAuliffe in the delivery of the Strategy and Plan.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services informed the meeting that the City Council plan to use Creative
Ireland funding for the development of Micro Cultural Spaces in public and community buildings
2(b) To Consider the Chief Executive's Report on the Public Consultation in relation to the Issues
Paper to inform the preparation of the Draft Galway City Development Plan 2023 - 2029.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator gave Councillors an update on the recommendation ofthe
Procedures Committee to Council regarding a series of Special Council Meetings to be held in June
to consider the Chief Executive's Report on submission and observations received on the Pre- Draft
Development Plan public consultation process as follows: Wednesday 9th June; Wednesday 16 June;
Monday 21st June and Wednesday 23rd June (if required)
Mr. McMahon also reminded Councillors of other meeting dates scheduled:
Monday 14th June - Ordinary Council meeting - 3 pm
Friday 18th June - Annual meeting - 3 pm
Monday 28th June — June Adjournment Council meeting - 3 pm (if required)
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
To approve the following schedule of meeting dates to consider to consider the Chief
Executive's Report on submissions and observations received on the Pre- Draft Development
Plan public consultation process for consideration (in accordance with Section 13 (4) of the
Planning and Development Act):
Wednesday 9th June at 3pm
Wednesday 16 June at 3pm
Monday 21st June at 3pm
Wednesday 23rd June at 3pm (if required)
This was agreed and the meeting dates were approved.
8
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested that the Annual Meeting be moved to a later time of 4pm as was
customary advising there is a Northern and Western Regional Assembly meeting scheduled for llam
jn Roscommon for that date. This request was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. Mayor Cubbard advised
that this request could be considered by the Procedures Committee.
4(e) Chief Executive's Report:
i. April 2021
ii. May 2021
Mayor Cubbard proposed that the Chief Executive's Report be taken as read and invited queries from
Councillors. This was agreed.
Councillors discussed the April and May Chief Executive's Reports. Matters raised are listed by
Directorate for ease of reference and included:
Housing and Building
When will details of Affordable housing scheme be available;
3 units of traveller housing on the Headford Road, query if this is halting site type
accommodation;
When will Affordable housing come on stream;
Update on homelessness services and long term plan with a need for more staffing ;
Request for a tour of Ard Cré facility, Ballymoneen Road;
Request for costings of the Cold Weather Response;
Update on Housing at Doughiska Road;
Compliments on Ard Cré housing development;
Update on Choice Based Letting and if any delays i.e. Garda vetting.
Road Transport and Safety
Timeline on the delivery of Tuam Road/Parkmore;
Need for enforcement of parking at schools;
Query if a five year plan for road surfacing in Mervue, Bohermore, Shantalla areas;
Query regarding the number of submissions for the bus corridor;
Inclusion of 113 & 114 Gleann na Coille - anti skid measure;
Safe pelican crossing required at Western Distributor Road roundabouts at the Bishop
O'Donnell and Cappagh Road;
Millars Lane drainage and surfacing;
Detail on Fr. Griffin Avenue upgrade;
Why St. Marv s and Briarhill were not included in safe school routes programme;
Details on the proposed removal of bicycle stands outside the County Council building in
Prospect Hill;
Concerns regarding a proposal for works at Eglington canal which has a narrow steep incline;
Welcome Barna woods proposals, query if parking at entrance be designated for disabled
persons;
Location of driver feedback signage;
Line markings for bus priority squares;
9
Road strengthening at Henry Street and Davis Street;
Long term flood barriers at the Spanish Arch;
Welcome BusConnects — query if report will be available and circulated before the end of
Update on cycle networks in the Eastside and how were they prioritised including
Ballyloughane and Doughiska South and the pressing issue of cycle networks at Monivea Road
and Doughiska North;
Query regarding school zones and if they are permanent and welcomed the examination of
the safety of plastic spots when wet; query if schools located in higher speed limit zones can
be considered for the programme;
Query if consideration could be given to the pedestrianisation of Salthill at weekends for
example after 5pm on a Sunday;
Request for clear timelines for cycling network;
Complexity of BusConnect project;
When will Doughiska, Ballyloughane cycle routes be completed;
Will Martin Roundabout be completed in Quarter 3 this year;
Query why Menlo, Tirellan, Bushypark and Castlegar not included in Safe Schools programme;
Feedback signs not working at certain locations, query if a maintenance contract in place;
Bridge maintenance at Dyke Road welcomed;
Need for road safety improvements along the Promenade;
Street lighting policy in areas of the city where no footpaths.
Development Management — Planning
• Tourism and issues with short term lets.
Environmental Services • Recreation and Amenity
Lighting required at Michael Collins Road to the running track in Mervue;
Update on the Barna Ecological Assessments and if they have taken place;
Update on Toft Park ornamental garden;
Update on Amenity Plan for White Oaks and Kingston;
Update on laneway at Cimin M6r;
No. of fines issued for dog fouling;
Query on Rahoon grave spaces and capacity;
Compliments to Mr. S. Walsh and the Parks team on new grass cutting initiatives available to
view on the City Council website;
Water Safety — welcome extra lifebuoys;
Update on air quality location at Briarhill;
Compliments to the 'you dirty pup' campaign for dog fouling and single use cup;
Request to dress up temporary toilet facilities and provide signage;
Request that fees for usage of Mervue track be suspended and open access to the public at
certain hours;
Request for Town Hall style public meetings in relation to the preparation of the Green
Infrastructure Strategy;
Update on Japanese knotweed;
Update on proposed new cemetery, Dublin Road;
10
Dog fouling problem;
Issue with refuse bins overflowing at Shop Street, Quay Street and Salthill;
Illegal dumping at locations in the city including Quarry Road;
Compliment to grass cutting team;
Requirement for toilets at Merlin Woods allotments;
Need for Solar bins in Salthill and advising they are suitable and rental bins could be provided;
Query if signage could be put at Toft Park wildflower meadow;
Query for update on the Kingston Plan;
Update on lighting at the Westside track facility;
Playground application grants scheme and the need for sensory garden and communication
boards under capital grants scheme for non-verbal children in playground in the city;
Update on wheelchair access to beaches;
Request for light and water in the Millers Lane area;
Westside running track and the consultation process;
Query if extra litter management staff recruited during Summer season,
Request for unlocked open access to Mervue running track for the public;
Corrib Park Phase 11 — if ancillary works could be completed including toilets.
Economic Development, Culture, Community Development, Water Services, Corporate & ICT
Support Services
What consultation taking place with businesses and taxi drivers regarding outdoor dining;
Raven terrace outdoor dining space and the need to consider residents;
Request for a permanent exhibition of traveller culture in the Galway City Council Museum;
Request for consultation with Bowling Green residents and other city residents on any
outdoor space proposals;
Request for Area Committee meetings;
Request for a public realm and outdoor dining in the Eastside of the city;
Query if Planet Youth could be invited to Council meeting;
Potential public space outside Spar in Roscam;
Irish Water and an issue with no water in Merlin Stream;
Informed meeting that bicycle stand at Prospect hill is being relocated and not removed to
make outdoor space and compliments to the Transport team on the roll out of
pedestrianisation and outdoor dining;
Need for consultation with residents regarding outdoor dining i.e. Raven terrace;
Welcome schemes by Sports Partnership and Keepwell and queried if there is a staffing
resource within Galway City Council available to deal with Community Wellbeing;
Compliments to work carried out by Galway City Council Departments and the Community
Call helpline in relation to COVID.
Human Resources
• Query regarding the approval process for new posts in Galway City Council;
• Why no increase in staff in Galway City Council since 2006;
• Query if apprenticeship schemes could be used.
11
Cllr. M. O'Connor requested that her Motion no. 22/2021 regarding speed limit signage be
considered. Cllr. N. Murphy seconded her proposal.
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye-laws but now needs correction on its own
merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered.
Mayor Cubbard invited the Council to attend the Galway City Mayor's Awards which will be held
online for the first time at 6pm on Wednesday 26th May 2021.
It was agreed that each Director of Services and relevant staff member would respond to the queries
specific to their area by programme group. Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services; Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior
Engineer; Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services; Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer and Mr. McGrath, Chief
Executive responded to queries raised.
Mayor Cubbard noted that Cllrs. M. O'Connor; C. Higgins and D. Lyons had indicated to speak and
will be accommodated at the June Ordinary meeting.
4(g) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund (Call 2) - To receive update.
Not Considered
4(h) Transport Updates
o Cross-City Link/ Dublin Road Bus Corridor - Update on Non-Statutory Consultation.
o Cycleways at Ballyloughane & along Eglinton Canal - Next Steps -To hear a report.
Not Considered
4(i) Coirib go Cåsta - Galway City Flood Relief Scheme - to receive presentation.
Not Considered
4(k) Decarbonising Zones - To Hear a Presentation.
Not Considered
4(1) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings.
Not Considered
4(m) Galway City Council lands adjacent to Cappagh Park
Not Considered
4(n) Quarterly Report, January - March 2021.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
12
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in
the Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the
National Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be
exhumed from Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin
Cemetery.'
Not Considered
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and
Employment that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to
multi-national corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic
systems, should be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services
Union) asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures
during the pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to
discuss what direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not Considered
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings
with 'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost
savings in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the
environmental section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered
13
Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021 and agreed for inclusion
on the agenda for Special meeting.
Supported by: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C.
Higgins; E. Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. CConnor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street
to accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be
also made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 19/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 14th April 2021
I request Galway City Council to immediately complete the footpath on the
Ballymoneen Road south of the entrance to Ashleigh Grove and north of the Doire Beag
estate and if necessary to initiate a Compulsory Purchase Order to compulsory purchase
the land required for the footpath completion in the interest of pedestrian safety
Reply issued 20th April 2021.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport
and Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create
a Water Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed
works together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way
currently being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered
NOM 21/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 21st April 2021, amended 22nd April 2021
Galway City Council agrees to put in place the following measures in Salthill to
counteract littering;
1. A plastic bottle and aluminium can deposit unit
2. Solar powered compactor bins
Reply issued on 7th May 2021.
14
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit
signage. This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs
correction on its own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered
NOM 23/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
Swans in Goal River are using litter as part of their nest building material. This is dreadful
for the swans, local people and tourists alike. I propose Galway City Council engage with
other stakeholders such as An Taisce, voluntary groups and water management crews
to maximise the hygiene of known nest building sites of local swans. I request a co-
ordinated litter management plan be formed and carried out at an optimal time before
nesting season.
Reply issued 5th May 2021
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not Considered.
NOM 25/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
In light of commitments from Minister for Transport Eamon Ryan to review the Galway
Transport Strategy in 2022, that Galway City Council requests a meeting with the
Minister to understand his scope for the review as well as for Councillors to convey their
views on the implementation on key transport projects and initiatives for Galway 5 years
after the Strategvs agreement.
Reply issued on 10th May 2021.
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership,
and in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning
permission from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible
a convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for
illegal quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACs or SPAS.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
15
NOM 27/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th May 2021
That this council urgently reviews the Casual Trading Bye Laws to allow / improve the
experience of visiting our outdoor amenities across the City.
The sale of refreshments to be allowed under licence at Silver Strand, Cappagh Park /
Barna Woods, BallyLoughane Beach, Gratten Rd Beach, Merlin Woods.
These changes in bye laws would also include litter management.
In the short term a temporary licence be offered for the summer of 2021.
Reply issued 5th May 2021
6. QUESTIONS
Question 13/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. P. Keane
Date Received: 7th April 2021
During the currency of the 2014-2019 Council, a Motion was passed directing the
Executive of Galway City Council ("GCC") to revert to Councillors with a full Report prior
to GCC considering any request by the Tenant of the property situate at Forster Street
Galway comprising the old Tourist Office to transfer its interest in the property to any
Third Party. The property compromises the former Tourist Office at Forster Street
Galway held by way of Lease granted by GCC to Fåilte Ireland for the operation of a
Tourist Office. In circumstances where no such Report was prepared and/or furnished
to Councillors in compliance with the terms of the Motion, can Galway City Council
explain how and why a formal Consent issued to Fåilte Ireland whereby GCC consented
to the Assignment, Sub-Lease or otherwise of the existing Lease in respect of the
Property.
Not Considered.
Question 14/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
To ask for an update on Galway City Council's Vacant Site Register; was the €322,000
due in January from the 6 sites on the register, per the latest update to the Planning
SPC, collected to support the provision of housing and regeneration of land by the
Council, has a review of the next sites progressed and if so what is the number of
individual sites identified at this stage, and will the Council update Councillors should
additional sites be added to the Register?
Not Considered.
Question 15/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th May 2021
Could you please report to members.
How many parking tickets have been issued across the City and Salthill since the lifting
of the first covid lockdown.
How many tickets have been issued by post rather than a physical ticket on car.
16
Are photos to be taken of each offence and when are these tickets loaded up to view?
How can an appeal be made if no photo has been filed or sent to alleged offender.
When is the policy of not putting physical tickets on cars to be ended.
Can you also outline appeals process for business owners who are supplying goods to
their businesses in a non commercial vehicle if on a loading bay.
Not Considered.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
• —circulated.
(b) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council —
circulated.
(c) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
• —circulated.
(d) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council —
circulated.
(e) Publication from Department of Social Protection, General Register Office - Public Consultation
on the reform of the method by which deaths are notified and registered — circulated.
(f) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Housing, Local Government & Heritage — circulated.
(g) Correspondence dated 5th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Public
Expenditure & Reform — Reply to NOM 30/2020 — Cllr. N. McNelis — circulated.
(h) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Justice — Reply to NOM 3/2021 — Cllr. F. Fahy — circulated.
(i) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Dün Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council
— circulated.
(j) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council —circulated.
(k) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Department of Housing, Local
Government & Heritage — Urban Regeneration and Development Fund — Ca112 — circulated.
(l) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Children, Equality, Disability, Integration & Youth — Reply to NOM 3/2021 —Cllr. F. Fahy— circulated.
(m) Correspondence dated 15th March 2021 received from Valuation Office — Deferral of
Revaluation — Making of Order under section 21(4) of the Valuation Act — circulated.
(n) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Kerry County Council — circulated.
(o) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Finance — Reply to NOM 30/2020 — Cllr. N. McNelis — circulated.
(p) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Galway County Council — circulated.
(q) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Louth County Council — circulated.
(r) Correspondence dated 29th March 2021 received from Mayo County Council —circulated.
(s) Correspondence dated 15th April 2021 received from Sligo County Council — copy attached.
(t) Correspondence dated 15th April 2021 received from Sligo County Council — copy attached.
(u) Correspondence dated 16th April 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council — copy
attached.
(v) Correspondence dated 16th April 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council — copy
attached.
(w) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council — copy attached.
(x) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council — copy attached.
(y) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council — copy attached.
(z) Correspondence dated 30th April 2021 received from Dün Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council —
copy attached.
17
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
9. CONFERENCES
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting ended at 16:55p.m.
IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
18