 
Minutes of Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Friday  
10th June 2016, at 6.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway. 
 
 
Presiding: 
Cllr. F. Fahy, Mayor of the City of Galway. 
 
Present: 
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ó Conchúir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, 
M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, 
P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, A. Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, 
T. O’Flaherty and J. Walsh. 
 
 
In Attendance:            Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive, 
 
 
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Services, 
   
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,  
                           Ms E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services  
  
  
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services, 
 
 
Mr. D. Mahon, Meetings Administrator, 
 
 
Mr. G. McMahon A/Senior Executive Officer 
 Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer. 
 
Mayor Fahy proposed, seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly the suspension of Standing Orders to permit 
photography in the Chamber during the Meeting. This was agreed. 
 
Mayor Fahy welcomed Councillors and the large audience gathered in the foyer to the Annual 
Meeting of Galway City Council. Mayor Fahy thanked his wife Ger and his family for their support 
over the past year in his role as Mayor of the City, he also thanked the Deputy Mayor and all the 
elected members, the staff of Corporate Services, the Chief Executive and Management Team for 
their support and assistance, the outdoor staff and all those who had made his term as Mayor a 
fruitful and enjoyable time. Mayor Fahy noted his highlights and achievements over the past year, in 
particular, events he attended celebrating the 1916 Commemoration at Dublin Castle and the GPO, 
Thurles, Bohermore Cemetery, Carnmore and Athenry. Mayor Fahy was particularly complimentary 
to the Irish Army and local schools for organising flag raising days. Mayor Fahy spoke about the 
renaming of the boat the ‘Fiona’ to the ‘Manuela’ and thanked all those involved in the renaming 
and the events surrounding the event.  
 
The designation of Bi-lingual status on the City was also noted as a particular highlight and 
achievement to which the Mayor offered thanks to Gaillimh le Gaeilge and the President Michael D. 
Higgins for his attendance at a Special Meeting to confer the designation. The opening of Ballinfoile 
Community Centre and the Twinning of Galway and the City of Menlo Park in California were 
outlined as significant achievements. Mayor Fahy spoke about a number of events that he was 
honoured to attend during his term including a double ordination in Galway Cathedral and birthday 
celebrations for a 104 and 102 year old. Sporting achievements over the term were noted including 
success for Connacht Rugby and local GAA teams. Mayor Fahy acknowledged a number of sporting 
groups in the city and thanked them for their support to him as Mayor.  
 
The European Capital of Culture 2020 bid was outlined as a significant opportunity for the city and 
the Mayor stated his delight to have been in Dublin Castle as the bid finalists (Stage 1) were 

announced in November 2015. Mayor Fahy complimented the bid team for the work to date. The 
designation of Region of Gastronomy was noted as another significant achievement for the City and 
County. Mayor Fahy spoke about his trips abroad to represent the City on 5 occasions and also 
stated how impressed he was with the level of volunteering in the City. He referenced the Mayor’s 
Awards and the opportunity to honour a number of people and groups at Mayoral Receptions 
including Special Olympians, Boxing medallists and the Galway Race Committee.  
 
The Mayor noted the number of Ambassadors he had received in City Hall and a number of 
interviews conducted for local and international media. A number of sombre occasions arose during 
the term which were noted by the Mayor including where books of condolences were opened to 
honour those who passed including two former Freemen of the City. Mayor Fahy thanked all those 
who had received him at over 600 events and thanked Cathaoirleach of County Galway Cllr. P. Roche 
for his hospitality in the County.  Mayor Fahy also complimented the Chamber of Commerce, Galway 
City Business Association and NUIG. Finally, Mayor Fahy thanked the people of Galway for their 
kindness and respect, appreciation, stating he was forever humbled and grateful. He noted that 
Galway was a wonderful city with fantastic positivity. Mayor Fahy offered particular thanks to the 
residents of Menlo for their support and assistance over the past year. 
 
Mayor Fahy thanked Deputy Mayor Cllr. N. McNelis and offered his best wishes to the incoming 
Mayor and Deputy Mayor.  
 
Councillors then extended compliments to Mayor Fahy and congratulated him on his achievements 
during his term. The achievements and highlights were noted and acknowledged and members 
thanked the outgoing Mayor for his courtesy and fairness, for taking his role seriously, for 
demonstrating commitment to the role and duties of Mayor of the City, for his energy and 
enthusiasm and his commitment to the Irish Language, for representing the city locally, nationally 
and internationally and for engaging with young people. Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath expressed 
thanks and compliments to the Mayor on his behalf and all the staff in Galway City Council noting 
that Cllr. Fahy had represented the City with dignity and pride during his term.  
 
1.  
Election of Mayor 
Cllr. F. Fahy sought nominations for the election of Mayor for the coming term.  
 
Cllr. N. Larkin was proposed by Cllr. J. Walsh and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell. 
 
Cllr. J. Walsh spoke in favour of his proposal and outlined the qualities, capabilities and experience of 
Cllr. Larkin which he stated qualified him as a suitable and appropriate person to become Mayor of 
Galway. Cllr. Walsh noted that Cllr. Larkin had demonstrated the highest integrity and 
professionalism as a public representative and had displayed a commitment to public service. Cllr. D. 
McDonnell, as seconder of the proposal, also spoke in favour of the nomination of Cllr. Larkin. No 
other nomination was received.  
 
Cllr. F. Fahy declared that Cllr. N. Larkin was deeded elected Mayor of Galway unanimously by the 
18 members present.  
 
The meeting then adjourned for 15 minutes to allow for photographs and recommenced at 7.10 pm.  
 

Mayor Larkin thanked his proposer and seconder and the Councillors for unanimously supporting his 
nomination. He then thanked his family and friends for all the support provided to him as an elected 
representative and in becoming Mayor. Mayor Larkin stated that it was an honour for him to 
become Mayor of Galway. Mayor Larkin stated he was extremely proud to be elected Mayor and 
grateful for the nomination received from his colleagues. He advised that he would prioritise the 
aspirations he set out on becoming Mayor.  
 
Cllr. Fahy noted that the meetings of City Council are important and provide an opportunity to work 
together as a team for the betterment of the City. Meetings are formal events and decisions must be 
taken on areas under out remit in relation to strategic issues facing the City. Managing the City is not 
an insignificant task and Mayor Larkin set out the priority to complete the business on each agenda 
by working together. The Standing Orders governing the operation of meetings are being updated 
and Mayor Larkin stated his desire that the revised Standing Orders will assist Council in meeting its 
obligation to the people of Galway and thereby uphold the mandate of the elected Councillors.  
 
A number of Councillors then offered congratulations to Mayor Larkin and his family on his election 
as Mayor of Galway. Councillors offered advice to the Mayor and wished him all the best for the year 
ahead. His leadership qualities and abilities were noted and Councillors welcomed him to the 
position of Mayor and offered him their support. Chief Executive Mr. McGrath on behalf of the staff 
of the City Council congratulated Mayor Larkin on his election and offered him the support of the 
Chief Executive and Senior Management Team and all the staff of the Council. 
 
Mayor Larkin thanked the Councillors for their support and kind words and thanked all those in 
attendance in the Foyer for their support to him and his family. Mayor Larkin also expressed his 
thanks to his late parents stating how proud they would now be.  
 
2. 
Election of Deputy Mayor  
Mayor Larkin thanked and complimented outgoing Deputy Mayor Cllr. N. McNelis and called for 
nominations for the office of Deputy Mayor for the coming term.  
 
Cllr. P. Flannery was proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. J. Walsh 
 
Cllr. F. Fahy spoke in favour of his proposal and outlined the qualities, capabilities and experience of 
Cllr. Flannery which he stated qualified him as a suitable and appropriate person to become Deputy 
Mayor of Galway. No other nomination was received.  
 
Mayor Larkin declared that Cllr. P. Flannery was deeded elected Deputy Mayor of Galway 
unanimously by the 18 members present 
 
Cllr. P. Flannery thanked his proposer and seconder and for the Councillors for supporting his 
nomination. He noted that it was an honour for him to be elected Deputy Mayor and outlines some 
priorities for the coming term including a focus on job creation, an objective he stated he shared 
with the Mayor.  
 
Councillors congratulated Cllr. Flannery on his election and also thanked and complimented 
outgoing Deputy Mayor Cllr. McNelis. Outgoing Deputy Mayor Cllr. McNelis also spoke to thank 
outgoing Mayor Fahy and offered support for Cllr. Flannery in his role over the coming term. Chief 
Executive Mr. McGrath also thanked Cllr. McNelis for his work and dedication over the past year and 

offered his support and that of the staff and congratulations to Deputy Mayor Flannery for the 
coming term.  
 
3. 
Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies  
(a) 
Galway Civic Trust 
Appointment of Two (2) Members (for a period of one year)  
Previous Members: Cllr. B. Cameron and Cllr. F. Fahy 
Non Group – Appointment by Vote 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons, outgoing members Cllr. B. 
Cameron and Cllr. F. Fahy were jointly nominated for a further period of one year.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell and seconded by Cllr. A. Marley, Cllr. C. Connolly and Cllr. C. Ó 
Conchúir were jointly nominated for a period of one year.  
 
A roll call vote was called by Cllrs. MJ Crowe, C. Connolly, M. Farrell and D. McDonnell. This was 
agreed. It was further agreed to take both nominations received together in one roll call vote. 
 
Cllr. B. Cameron and Cllr. F. Fahy 
 
 11 votes 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. 
D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. T. O’Flaherty and Cllr. J. Walsh. 
 
Cllr. C. Connolly and Cllr Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir 
7 votes  
 
Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. MJ Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. P. Keane and 
Cllr. A. Marley.  
 
Mayor Larkin declared the result and Cllr. Cameron and Cllr. Fahy were declared elected. 
 
 
(b) 
Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd 
Appointment of One (1) Member (for a period of one year). 
Previous Member: Cllr. D. McDonnell  Non Group – Appointment by Vote  
On the proposal of Cllr. T. O’Flaherty and seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely, outgoing member Cllr. D. 
McDonnell was nominated for a further period of one year.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir and seconded by Cllr. A. Marley, Cllr. C. Connolly was 
nominated for a period of one year.  
 
In Favour of Cllr. D. McDonnell: 
13 votes  
In Favour of Cllr. C. Connolly: 
 
4 votes 
Absent: 
 
 
 
1 member 
 
Mayor Larkin declared the result and Cllr. D. McDonnell declared elected. 
 
 

(c) 
Galway/Salthill Fáilte Ltd 
Appointment of Eight (8) persons i.e. 5 Members of City Council and 3 Non Members (for a period 
of two years). 
Previous Members: Cllrs. D. Lyons, J. Walsh, B. Cameron, N. Larkin, P. Connelly and Mr. J. 
Mulholland, Ms. C. McBride Shields, Ms. K. O’Sullivan  
Non Group – Appointment by Vote 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron, outgoing members Cllrs. D. 
Lyons, J. Walsh, B. Cameron, N. Larkin, P. Connelly, Mr. J. Mulholland, Ms. C. McBride Shields and 
Ms. K. O’Sullivan were nominated for a further period of two years.  
 
No other nominations were received.  
 
Mayor Larkin declared the result and Cllrs. D. Lyons, J. Walsh, B. Cameron, N. Larkin, P. Connelly 
and Mr. J. Mulholland, Ms. C. McBride Shields and Ms. K. O’Sullivan were deemed elected.  
 
4. 
To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council 
 
A schedule of dates for Ordinary Meetings for the coming term were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and 
seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely. The dates as listed on the schedule were unanimously agreed.  
 
13th June 2016  
4th July 2016 (change of date agreed (previously) at Council meeting held on 9th May, 2016) 
12th September, 2016 
10th October 2016 
14th November, 2016 
12th December, 2016 
9th January, 2017 
13th February, 2017 
13th March, 2017 
10th April, 2017 
8th May, 2017 
12th June, 2017 
 
It was further proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely that the June 2016 
Ordinary Meeting scheduled for Monday 13th June would commence at 3.00 pm.  
 
An amendment was proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell that the June 2016 
Ordinary Meeting would commence at 4.00 pm.  
 
Votes In favour of 3.00 pm commencement: 
 
12 
Votes In favour of 4.00 pm commencement: 
 
6 
 
Mayor Larkin declared that it was therefore agreed that the June Ordinary Meeting would 
commence at 3.00 pm by 12 votes in favour and six votes in favour of 4.00 pm.  
 
 
The Meeting ended at 8.15 pm. 
