Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
Held on Monday 10th July, 2017,
at 4.00 p.m. in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding: Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors Present: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
In Attendance: Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive, Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Mr. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services, Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of
Services, Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services, Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator,
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer, Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner, Ms. H. Coleman,
Senior Executive Planner, Mr. D. Flood, A/Senior Executive Engineer, Ms. J. Georges,
Clerical Officer.
The Mayor suggested that the meeting finish at 7.30 p.m. This was proposed by Cllr. B. Cameron
and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis and agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
(a) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Wednesday 7th June 2017
Proposed:
Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Matters Arising: Cllr. C. Connolly sought clarity on the legality of the Meeting.
Mayor Flannery advised that the Meeting of 7th June 2017 was lawfully constituted and the Chief
Executive, Mr. McGrath confirmed this was to be the case.
The Minutes were adopted.
1 (b) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 19th June, 2017
Proposed:
Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded:
Cllr. B. Cameron
Matters Arising: A synopsis of matters arising is outlined below:
Cllr. P. Conneely: Upkeep of Roundabouts, update on sale of Tourist Office on Forster Street and
proposed new location, if any.
Cllr. O. Crowe: Corrib Great Southern Hotel site, condition of playgrounds and request for a report.
Cllr. M. Cubbard: Corrib Great Southern site update, Ballinfoile community centre.
Cllr. C. Connolly: Tourist office update, Derelict sites, request for report on parking meters and
documentation issued to be paginated.
Cllr. F. Fahy: Ballinfoile Community Centre, Corrib Great Southern site, Roundabouts.
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty: Maintenance of Roundabouts, Playgrounds, Corrib Great Southern site.
Cllr. D. McDonnell: Tuam Road bus corridor, Terryland business park, Roundabouts, Corrib Great
Southern site, playgrounds, request for street light for Mervue.
Cllr. D. Lyons: Tourist Office update, request for details of outsourcing of works with regard to
parks.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe: Parking machines, new signage in particular where elderly reside regarding no
cycling on paths, green spaces and request for report.
Cllr. N. McNelis: Grass cutting early in the morning and notice of motion regarding Kingston Road,
Knocknacarra community centre, Cappagh Park tender, kiosk in Eyre square, Salthill tourist office,
Sunday parking.
Cllr. N. Larkin: Tuam Road Bus corridor timescale.
Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir: Kingston grass cutting notice of motion, tender for Cappagh pitches.
Cllr. M. Lohan: Ardaun local area plan, social housing, request for details of works completed on
playgrounds.
Cllr. B. Cameron: Housing, homelessness, Millennium Park, graffiti in playgrounds, roundabouts
upkeep, parking meters in Newcastle.
Cllr. M. Farrell: Roundabouts, outsourcing and business case for jobs, Corrib Great Southern site
update.
A number of Councillors wished the Mayor well in his new role and also thanked Mr. T. Donohue
and the Recreation & Amenity Department on their good work on green spaces in the City.
Responses to queries and requests for further clarification were provided by Mr. T. Connell, Director
of Services, Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services and Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive.
Mr. Connell provided updates on queries raised across his Directorate advising that contractors
were on site maintaining roundabouts across the City with substantial works to be carried out
within the week. He advised that there was a detailed procurement process followed along with
discussions with Unions regarding the outsourcing of some works. He confirmed that the budget for
the maintenance and upgrading of 26 playgrounds was €150,000 and that a Report will be provided
to the Council. With reference to parking meters, he advised that a tender has been advertised to
replace 25 meters and upgrade technology. Mr. Connell confirmed that signage had been altered
with regard to Sunday parking and that Community Wardens are working on Sundays. Mr. Connell
confirmed that Kingston Road was part of the grass cutting programme and that Cappagh pitches
were being tendered as a public facility.
Mr. Connell advised that the Tuam Road bus corridor consists of two phases and is currently at
design stage. The corridor was discussed at the Transport SPC, views of the Councillors, business
members and general public were taken into account and it will come back before the Council by
the end of the year. Phase 1 is expected to be delivered without the need for Compulsory
acquisition of some lands that are required to complete the project.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services advised that a meeting will be held regarding Ballinfoile
community centre to finalise details to open the centre in August 2017. Ms. Ruane confirmed that
the Corrib Great Southern building is included in the derelict sites register and that a valuation has
been completed. Ms. E. Ruane confirmed that the Ardaun Plan was being finalised and would go on
to public consultation as soon as possible thereafter.
2
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive confirmed that preplanning meetings had taken place in relation to
the Corrib Great Southern site. He noted that grass cutting had started ahead of schedule and that
extra money was included in the budget to fund this. He stated that most local authorities do not
cut grass in estates that are taken in charge. He advised that the City Council has not invested its
workforce or machinery, which will be a decision to make at budget time.
In relation to the Tourist office, the Chief Executive advised that Féilte Ireland indicated that the
tourist office was sold and it is actively seeking locations for a replacement tourist office. One
possible proposal is to replace and upgrade the kiosk in Eyre square. Regarding cycling on
foothpaths, he advised that some notices have been erected and there is a need for enforcement of
cycling/road traffic laws.
The Chief Executive acknowledged the good work of the Recreation & Amenity Department. He
confirmed that the City Council is the lead authority for the bus corridor from Claregalway to
Galway City. He referred to the Outdoor Workforce Plan that is currently with the Department for
approval. Mr. McGrath advised that approximately 85% of the City Council spend is collected locally.
He advised that rates, local property tax or charges for services were not increased by the Council
last year. He noted that there are competing demands and he reiterated that staff do a very good
job with the resources available.
The Minutes were adopted.
(c) Minutes of Annual Meeting of Galway City Council held on Friday, 23rd June 2017
Proposed:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded:
Cllr. B. Cameron
Matters Arising: A synopsis of matters arising is outlined below:
Cllr. O. Crowe: Request for a schedule of dates for Corporate Policy Group meetings.
Cllr. P. Conneely: Update on Report from expert group on any proposed amalgamation.
Cllr. D. Lyons: Membership of the Expert group regarding amalgamation.
The Chief Executive advised that a schedule of CPG meetings will be re-circulated. He said that a
Report from the Galway Expert Advisory group on Local Government Arrangements in Galway was
expected and the next phase will include a full and detailed consultation with the elected members
of the City & Council Councils. Mr. McGrath also confirmed that the new Head of Galway 2020 has
stood down from the Expert group.
The Minutes were adopted.
3
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) To consider a Mid-Term Review of Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 - 2018
pursuant to the Traveller Accommodation Act 1998
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services referred to a proposed planning and dialogue workshop
facilitated by CENA, to consider models of best practice for the design of culturally appropriate
accommodation. She advised that a joint meeting with the Strategic Policy Committee and the Local
Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee is scheduled for Friday 14th July 2017 and that
matters arising would be brought before the Council for consideration. Following discussion it was
proposed to defer the item to allow the L TACC consider the CENA report in the first instance and to
revert to the matter at a Special Meeting thereafter at which the TAP Review would be considered.
"That a Special Meeting be convened, if necessary on Monday 17th July at 2p.m. to
discuss Item 2 (a)".
Proposed: Mayor, Cllr. P. Flannery
In Favour: 14
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Against: 2
Cllr. B. Cameron
Present: 16
The motion was approved.
On the basis of the approval of the above Motion, Item 2 (a) was deferred.
2 (b) Draft Scheme of Letting Priorities 2017
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services outlined the proposed changes and amendments to the
Scheme of Letting Priorities which included reference to Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) as a
social housing option, policy in relation to housing transfer and to allow for the provision of Choice
Based Letting.
A general discussion was held covering items such as rents, query regarding solicitor's letters to the
City Council from HAP landlords, landlords allegedly opting out of schemes, tenant handbook,
reference to specific residents, segregation, application of the scheme to Approved Housing Bodies,
minimum age to submit an application, personal data, housing need, clarity regarding those on
waiting list prior to 2011, returning emigrants, refusal of RAS and that tenants be advised when
signing for a lease with a voluntary body that if they require a transfer in the future the voluntary
body is responsible for any transfer and not the Local Authority. In relation to the designation of
Galway as a rent pressure zone it was requested that a formal submission be made to the
Department.
Ms. Philbin provided detailed replies on the queries raised by Councillors. Ms. Philbin stated that
she was not aware of specific solicitors' letters received, that housing applicants have to be over 18
years old and that the Scheme applied only to local authority tenants and not to Approved Housing
Bodies. She advised that there is discretion in extenuating circumstances regarding two weeks'
notice to notify of changes in circumstances. She confirmed that induction training is provided to
new housing tenants and that the tenancy handbook is being updated. With regard to undue
segregation she advised that a mix of private, part V and voluntary, social and affordable housing
counteracted this.
4
Following further consideration of the replies and matters of clarification, the adoption of the Draft
Scheme of Letting Priorities was proposed.
"That the Draft Scheme of Letting Priorities 2017 be adopted".
Proposed:
In Favour: 17
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Against: 1
Cllr. M. Lohan
Present: 18
The Scheme of Letting Priorities was adopted.
2 (c) Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Policy 2017.
Ms. P. Philbin presented the draft Anti-Social Behaviour (ASB) policy and advised that the policy was
last updated in 2010. She added that there were changes at a national level that will now be
reflected in the new policy. These changes arise principally from the Housing Act 2014. Ms. Philbin
provided a broad overview of the content of the draft policy and its objectives.
There was a general discussion regarding anti-social behaviour and it was agreed that people should
not suffer due to the actions of a minority arising from abuse of property, drugs and alcohol and
speeding cars. Items discussed included CCTV, Garda clearance, Community Guards, a request for
the scheme to be adopted by Voluntary Housing Bodies. Complaints between tenant and landlords
in schemes are referred to the Residential Tenancies Board. Requests for details of ASB to be
included on quarterly report, breeding of dogs, horses, ASB register, the unacceptability of racism,
dignity at work, analysis of systems under strategic objectives, fire safety and burning. Queries
raised included collation and co-ordination of data with the Gardai, application of the policy to
minors, definition of ASB with regards to noise and nuisance, PPE equipment, landlord responsibility
for removing tenants under the HAP scheme.
Ms. Philbin responded to the queries and advised that there are three Tenant Liaison Officers in
regular contact with the Gardai regarding instances of anti-social behaviour. Also, that case
conferences are co-ordinated by the Administrative Officer, Estate Management and there are good
communications on an inter-agency basis. She confirmed that complaints received are treated
confidentially and are not subject to release under Freedom of Information requests when given in
confidence. She advised that staff PPE equipment included boots, hi-viz jackets, working alone
device and mobile phone. She confirmed that under the Scheme a housing application can be
deferred or refused on the grounds of anti-social behaviour. Regarding fire safety she confirmed
that inspections and surveys will be completed in conjunction with the Fire Services of properties
over three storeys high.
Cllr. B. Cameron suggested an amendment to the policy that under no circumstances would legal
advice be provided by the Council to complainants of anti-social behaviour in the furtherance of
their claim.
The Chief Executive expressed some concern regarding the wording of the proposed amendment as
put forward by Cllr. B. Cameron.
5
Councillors offered their views on the amendment and a debate took place. Following further
discussion, it was agreed to consider the amendment that the wording after Section 8.4 in the
Scheme be amended as follows:
"That in the normal course of events legal advisors for Galway City Council should not be
provided to complainants of Anti-Social Behaviour to assist in the furtherance of their claims".
Proposed:
In Favour: 5
Cllr. B. Cameron
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Against: 13
Cllr. N. McNelis
Present: 18
The amendment was defeated.
Following further discussion, a vote was taken regarding the adoption of the Draft Anti-Social
Behaviour Policy 2017.
't That the Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Policy 2017 be adopted".
Proposed:
In Favour: 18
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Against: O
Cllr. M. Lohan
Present: 18
The Anti-Social Behaviour Policy was unanimously adopted.
Mayor P. Flannery proposed that Item 2(f) be taken next and this was agreed.
2 (f) To consider the Chief Executive's Report on the proposed Variations to Galway City
Development Plan 2017-2023 in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and Development Act
2000 as amended
Proposed Variation No. 1
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner presented the Chief Executive's Report on the proposed Variations to
Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023. Ms. Phelan advised that the purpose of the proposed
Variation No 1. is to allow for minor modifications of the N6 GCRR Route Corridor Reservation as
expressed in the City Development Plan Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map.
She informed the meeting that these modifications relate to a portion of the Route Corridor
Reservation in the East of the city in the Ballybrit/Briarhill/Coolagh area and in the N17 Tuam
Road/Parkmore area. Ms. Phelan confirmed that an SEA Environmental Report and a Natura Impact
Report were undertaken as part of the Variation process and these have concluded that the
proposed modifications to the Route Corridor will not have a significant adverse effect on the
environment. She informed the meeting in relation to the three submissions received.
6
Following consideration, a vote was taken on the proposed Variation No. 1.
"To amend Specific Objective relating to the Reserved Route Corridor for the N6
Galway City Ring Road (N6 GCRR) on the Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives
Map in the Ballybrit/Briarhill/CooIagh area and the N17 Tuam Road/Parkmore area
of the City".
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
In Favour: 15
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Against: 3
Present: 18
The variation was adopted.
Prooosed Variation No. 2
Ms. Phelan presented the Chief Executives Report which takes into account the proper planning and
sustainable development of the area, the statutory obligations of the Council and any relevant
policies or objectives of the Minister and relayed the recommendation to the Councillors not to
adopt the Proposed Variation No. 2. She informed the meeting regarding three submissions
received.
A discussion took place in relation to the proposed Variation No. 2, and the need to protect
Recreation and Amenity lands while considering that there is a need for housing.
"Change of land use zoning from Institutional and Community CF and Recreation and Amenity
RA to Residential R at the Presbytery, 24 Presentation Road".
"To accept the Chief Executive's recommendation".
Proposed:
Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded:
Cllr. M. Crowe
In Favour: 2
Abstain: O
Against: 16
Present: 18
The motion was defeated.
"Motion To adopt Proposed Variation No. 2
Proposed: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Seconded:
Cllr. B. Cameron
In Favour: 16
Abstain: O
Against: 2
Present: 18
The Variation was adopted.
In the context of Item 2(f), the Chief Executive advised Councillors that it may be an opportune time
to consider a motion to request that capital funding be included in the forthcoming Review of the
national capital infrastructure programme for the Galway Transport Strategy, which includes the
key provision of the Galway City Ring Road.
7
A discussion was held regarding the requirement to progress infrastructure in the best interests of
the City.
UThat Galway Transport Strategy and the Galway City Ring Road Project be financially
supported as a critical infrastructure projects for Galway".
Cllr. P. Conneely
Proposed:
Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded:
In Favour: 15
Abstain: 2
Against: 1
Present: 18
The motion was adopted.
Mayor P. Flannery proposed that Item 2(d) be taken next and this was agreed.
2 (d) S.85 Agreement between Cork County Council and Galway City Council for the delivery of
Housing programme under a Public Private Partnership at Ballyburke, Galway
Ms. P. Philbin, A/DOS referred to the report issued and advised the Meeting that the proposed
development comprised of 74 units at the Ballyburke site to be developed under a PPP scheme. The
proposed breakdown of units is 38 two bed units, 34 three bed units and 2 four bed units. She
advised that the lands will remain in Galway City Council's ownership and that the Council will have
100% nomination rights in the allocations process. She further advised that the tenants will pay a
differential rent to an Approved Housing Body (AHB) and that the PPP Company will receive a
monthly monetary charge over a 25 year period. After the 25 year period, the properties revert back
into the stock of the City Council. She informed the Meeting that it is proposed to bring forward a
Part 8 planning application before the Council for approval before year end. Ms. Philbin advised that
Cork County Council are the lead authority in this development and that the S.85 Agreement was
required to enable the scheme progress to planning and procurement.
A number of Councillors welcomed this development. A number of questions and comments were
raised, including accessibility in the three storey units, liability for property tax, parking, cycle lanes
to school, storage, accommodation for the elderly, finance, layout of the development,
maintenance and repair, roadway access and a suggestion to extend the road on to the Cappagh
Road at the end of the proposed development. Reference was also made that tenants cannot
purchase houses in the 25 year period and reference to a portion of land with single dwelling on
same.
At 7.30 p.m., an extension of the time of the meeting to 8.30 p.m. was suggested by the
Mayor. This extension of time was formally proposed by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and seconded by
Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
Ms. Philbin advised that the development is subject to the approval of a Part 8 planning application
with an expected 18 - 24 month construction period. She confirmed that there is an existing
dwelling on a portion of the land which was purchased by the City Council a number of years
8
previously. Ms. Philbin provided replies to the queries raised and noted that some of the issues
raised by Councillors would be addressed and considered at Part 8 stage.
"To approve S.85 Agreement between Cork County Council and Galway City Council for the
delivery of housing programme under a Public Private Partnership at Ballyburke, Galway".
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
In Favour: 17
Abstain: O
Against: O
Present: 17
The motion was adopted.
Mayor P. Flannery proposed Items 2(e) next and this was agreed.
2 (e) Capital Assistance Scheme - Raising of a loan under Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1992 for the acquisition of housing unit at 14 Bin Sin, Knocknacarra, Galway
Cllr. F. Fahy pointed out a discrepancy in the Report referring to the unit as both a one and two bed
unit in the accompanying correspondence. It was agreed that the item be deferred subject to
clarification at the next meeting.
It was agreed to take Item 3 (b) next on the agenda. It was proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly and
seconded by Cllr. T O' Flaherty that this item be taken as the first item at the September 2017
Meeting. Following consideration of the matter, it was agreed that the item should be considered as
part of the Agenda for the September Council meeting.
3 (b) Report from Environment, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee - Draft Street
Performance & Busking Byelaws 2017 - Deferred to September Council meeting.
Mayor P. Flannery proposed that Item 4 (f) be taken next and this was agreed.
4 (f) Social Inclusion Grants 2017
Mayor Flannery referred to the report circulated to Councillors and requested approval of 18 Social
Inclusion Grants as noted in the report. It was also agreed that the balance of funding available will
be re-advertised for other groups to make applications.
"To approve Social Inclusion Grants 2017".
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
In Favour: 18
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Cllr. C. Connolly
Against: O
The Social Inclusion grants were unanimously approved.
Present: 18
9
4 (g) To receive a presentation from the Local Authorities Water & Communities Office relating to
the draft River Basin Management Plan for the West Region.
A presentation was delivered by Ms. C. Seale, Community Water Officer relating to the River Basin
Management Plan for Ireland 2018 - 2021 and the public consultation process. She advised that the
deadline for submissions is 31st August 2017.
A number of Councillors raised water quality and related issues including Japanese knotweed, need
for a Water Safety Development Officer, Ballyloughane, Terryland River, the Corrib River and
Grattan Road. Councillors were advised that interested parties are invited to make submissions,
regardless of whether previous submissions were made to the Department, no later than 31st
August 2017.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath advised that this is an important document and that the Council
will make a submission, which will include Grattan Road and bathing waters in the City through the
Environment Section.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 10th February, 2017
Item deferred
(c) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 19th June, 2017
Item deferred
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Chief Executive's Reports for February 2017 to June 2017
Reported Noted without discussion.
(b) Chief Executive's Report for July 2017
Reported Noted without discussion.
(c) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17
Item Deferred.
(d) Christmas Market, 2016
A number Councillors complimented the very successful Christmas market in 2016. Cllr. McDonnell
proposed that traders on the Eastside of Eyre Square should have the opportunity to make a
proposal in relation to the Christmas Market for 2017. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly. No
vote was taken. Councillors discussed matters including public transport, taxi ranks and consultation
with traders.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath referred to a report issued to Councillors in March 2017 regarding
the Christmas Market 2017. He referred to a study visit to Christmas markets in the cities of Cork
and Waterford. He advised that under Planning & Development Licencing Regulations, an
application needed to be submitted by 13 August 2017.
10
"To advertise seeking expressions of interest for the operation of the Christmas Market 2017,
an evaluation process be conducted by the Executive and the best proposal to be chosen".
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe
In Favour: 18
Abstain: O
Seconded:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Against: O
Present: 18
The proposal was unanimously approved.
(e) Draft Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities 2017
Deferred.
(h) BREXIT
(i) Impacts / preparation / planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of Article 50 of
the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
Deferred
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging from Brexit
Deferred
(i) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th June 2017
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development
Items Deferred.
(j) European Capital of Culture, 2020
Deferred
5. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
Motion submitted to the Mayor which was not considered.
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly (NWRA),
the Western Development Commission (WDC) and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in
establishing a Smart Region to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Proposed:
Cllr. Niall McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. Pearce Flannery
Notice of Motions included on the Agenda were deferred.
6. QUESTIONS
None.
11
7. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORSI INFORMATION
None.
8. CONFERENCES
Conferences and Approved Training Events were proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by
Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
1)
2)
Parnell Summer School 2017
Title:
13th - 17th August 2017
Date:
Venue: Avondale House, County Wicklow
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
37th Annual MacGill Summer School & Arts Week
Title:
16th - 21st July 2017
Date:
Venue: Highlands Hotel, Glenties, County Donegal
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllrs. P. Keane, O.Crowe, P. Conneely, J. Walsh and P. Flannery.
Approved Training
(1)
(2)
(3)
Title: National Landscape Forum — Circulated 20th June 2017
Date: 23rd June 2017
Venue: Abbeyleix Manor Hotel, Abbeyleix
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllrs. P. Conneely and O. Crowe.
Summer CPD: Planning and Technology (IPI) — Circulated 21st June 2017
Date: 29th June 2017
Venue: Tipperary County Council Civil Offices, Co Tipperary
LAMA 2017 — Autumn Training Seminar
Date: 29th & 30th September 2017
Venue: Hotel Manila, Clonmel, Co Tipperary
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllrs. M. Lohan, B. Cameron, N. McNelis, P. Conneely, J. Walsh, O. Crowe, F. Fahy, D.
McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty and P. Flannery.
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
A vote of congratulations was proposed by Cllr. M. Cubbard and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron.
Congratulations to Ms. Eileen Molloy on celebrating her 100th birthday.
12
10. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
"That Galway City agree to host one scheduled Council Meeting at NUIG (October meeting)
and one at GMIT (Post Christmas — February)".
Proposed: Mayor, Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
In Favour: 18
Abstain: 0
Against: 0
Present: 18
The motion was adopted unanimously.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed "that a full breakdown of the 2017 LIS Scheme be provided to
Elected Members no later than Friday 28th July 2017, to include completed projects, on-going
works and works forecast for completion in each electoral area before year end 2017. I also
request a cost of each project be included in the report." This was seconded by Cllr. N.
McNelis and agreed.
The meeting concluded at 8.30 p.m.
es, Confi & Signed
Mapr
13
