Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 10th December, 2018,
at 2.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M.Cubbard, F. Fahy, P. Flannery, P. Keane, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D.
McDonnell, T.O'FIaherty and J. Walsh.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms
D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr.
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
M. O'Donnell, Head of Human Resources
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Councillors C. Connolly, M. Farrell, N. Larkin.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Mc Nelis proposed that the meeting would finish at 6.30pm, and commence with item
4(a) — Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy for the Northern and Western Regional
Assembly.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a)— Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy for the Northern and Western Regional
Assembly
Mr. David Minton, Director, and Mr. Denis Kelly, Assistant Director/ Senior Planner, Northern
and Western Regional Assembly, presented a report on the draft Strategy including the
1
Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan. The strategy is currently at consultation stage, until
February 2019.
Mayor McNelis invited queries on the report.
Comments and queries from the Councillors included:
Position of the NWRA on the outer bypass; inclusion of Claregalway in the strategy; inclusion
of rural towns and hinterland in the strategy; increasing provision of housing; Climate Change;
implications of Brexit; West on Track/ provision of rail; inclusion of Barna, Renvyle, Moycullen
and Athenry; inclusion of areas outside the jurisdiction; merger of Galway City and County
Councils; location of Dangan on map; Port of Galway, Technical university.
Mr. D. Minton and Mr. D. Kelly responded to Councillors queries comprehensively, and
indicated that the function of the strategy is to optimise national and EU Funding into the
NWRA area. In the strategy, Galway will be a key metropolitan town, consistent with County
Development Plans and RSES. Mr Minton and Mr Kelly invited Councillors to make further
submissions and comments on the Draft Strategy, and thanked Galway City Council for their
work on the Draft Strategy to date.
Mr. B. McGrath thanked Mr. Minton and Mr. Kelly for their presentation and highlighted the
importance of City Councillors examining the Strategy in its entirety before 8th of February, to
identify where the role of Galway City could be strengthened and made more robust. Ms. C.
Phelan indicated that a specific meeting will be organised to prepare a submission from
Galway City Council, from Planning and other Sections, in January 2019.
Mayor Mc Nelis thanked Mr D. Minton and Mr B. Kelly for their report.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 12th November
2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Item 1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 12th
November 2018 were adopted.
(b) Minutes of Bud et Meetin of Galway City Council held on 19th November 2018
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Item 1 (b) Minutes of Budget Meeting of Galway City Council held on 19th November 2018
were adopted
2
(c) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 26th November 2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 1 (c) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 26th November 2018
were adopted.
In Favour: 10 Against: 1 Abstain: 2 Present: 13
The minutes were adopted.
Matters of Accuracy
Cllr. P. Conneely indicated that he was not agreeable to the adoption of the minutes from
the 26th of November 2018.
It was noted that Councillors should submit any queries or clarifications in relation to the
Meeting Minutes in writing to the Meetings Administrator.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir requested an update on legal advice re Freedom of the City.
Mr. B. McGrath summarised the legal advice received. It is noted that Section 74 of the
Local Government Act 2001 (as amended by the Reform of Local Government Act 2014) sets
out the procedures for the conferral of the freedom of an administrative area on a person or
persons who, in the opinion of the Members are deserving of that honour. The current
legislation makes no reference to the deletion of a name from the roll of honour or the
reversal of a resolution to bestow the freedom of an administrative area. However, the
ordinary statutory powers granted to the Members of the City Council to make, revoke or
amend resolutions with regard to all of their reserved functions enables them to delete
names from the Roll of Honorary Freedom of the City if they so wish. Galway City Council
could pass a resolution to rescind the Freedom of the City and remove the named individual
from the Roll of Honorary Freedom, as per the example of Dublin City Council. In order to
pass the above Council must comply with standing orders for the revocation of resolutions.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the issue be passed to the Procedures Committee to progress.
This was agreed.
Cllr. F. Fahy noted for accuracy that a list of 14 areas being treated for Japanese knotweed
has not yet been received. Mr. B. McGrath indicated that this would be provided. Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty wished to record that some estates do not want the presence of knotweed to be
made known publicly.
Cllr B. Cameron requested the tidying up and removal of motions now dealt with. This was
seconded by Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir.
3
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Loan Approval for City Museum Project.
Mr. B. McGrath reported on clarification from Fåilte Ireland that the maximum expected
funding ceiling under the current funding scheme would be €5m. Based on a current
estimated overall project budget of €8.4m, and subject to a grant from Fåilte Ireland of not
less than €5m, at the November monthly meeting, it had been unanimously resolved to
approve in principle the balance of match funding required, in order to deliver this signature
landmark Cultural Infrastructure project, which will yield a significant cultural, social and
economic dividend for the city for many years to come.
Mr B. McGrath requested the elected members of Galway City Council to approve the
raising of a loan of up to €3.5m to underpin the Council's match-funding commitment to this
critically important project, with the draw-down of same subject to sufficient funding
approval from Féilte Ireland, as outlined.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
To approve the raising of a loan of up to €3.5m to underpin the Council's match-funding
commitment to the City Museum Project, with the draw-down of same subject to sufficient
funding approval from Fåilte Ireland, as outlined.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
(b) Section 183 — Disposal of Lands/ Premises by Way of Lease, at Carnmore, Co. Galway
(Galway Flying Club)
Galway City Council wishes to enter into a lease agreement with the Galway Flying Club Ltd.
for the temporary convenience of the parties for the use of the lands, runway, part of the
carpark and Flying Club building located on the property formerly known as Galway Airport
at Carnmore, Co. Galway. The lease agreement will facilitate:
• The entry into arrangements with the Galway Flying Club Ltd.
• Ongoing development of the site.
Members were requested to consider this Section 183 for approval.
The request was discussed. Queries raised by Councillors included potential for a lease for
more than 1 year; use of the facility as a Centre for Film; and future uses of the airport.
Mr. B. McGrath responded to Councillors' queries comprehensively. Mr. B. Mc Grath
indicated that a change in the term of the lease would have to be considered by Galway
County Council also, as a co-owner of the site. A rolling licence facilitates Galway Flying Club,
but can also allow Galway City Council to respond in the case of a proposal of significant size.
The site is a brownfield site with extensive economic potential. Various proposals have been
4
received for consideration, but economic and non-economic. Future aviation use cannot be
ruled out, but this would not be commercial on the same scale as Shannon. The equipment in
the airport is not fit for this purpose, and would need to be upgraded at significant cost. The
NDP mentions Galway airport. Galway County Council has sought regeneration funds for
further studies, with the support of the City. It is anticipated that a report would be brought
before Council by May 2019.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
To approve entering into a lease with Galway Flying Club for one year at the property
formerly known as Galway Airport, Carnmore, Co. Galway (Section 183).
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was passed.
Mayor Mc Nelis proposed to move to Item 4(d) Regeneration/ Refurbishment of City Centre
Pedestrianised Area. The speaker was not due to arrive until 4pm, so this report was put back.
Mayor McNelis then proposed to take Item 3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of
Thursday 6th September 2018. Councillors discussed this and agreed to move it to 3.30pm.
Mayor McNeils proposed to take item 2(c), which was agreed.
(c) 3 Year Capital Programme 2019-2021
Mr B. McGrath indicated that a full report would be put to Council in the February 2019
meeting. Mayor Mc Nelis invited comments and issues.
The report was discussed and considered. Comments from Councillors included:
The finish date for the Traveller Accommodation works on Circular Road; infill building on
green spaces; timing for consultation on pedestrianisation works; pathways on Circular Road;
Traffic Management on Munster Avenue; works on Salmon Weir Bridge; Keeraun Housing
development; Greenway plans; Ballyburke Lands; Coke Bikes and expansion of the scheme;
Irish Water main in Tonabrucky; contact with Department re Sailin; Community Planting
Initiative; housing provision and serviced lands; burial grounds for East of the city;
floodlighting of council sports facilities; opening hours in the Museum; Capital housing on
Monivea Road; Ballindooley Cross works; Lough Corrib Navigation Trust; Galway2020 Floral
Infrastructure Project; Woodquay Local Park; Fire Station in the East of the City; Galway City
Centre Transport Management Plan; issues re: siting of new houses close to existing houses;
Parkmore Bus Corridor; Radharc na Greine housing; Renmore Play facility; bus stop upgrades;
Corrib Park Phase 2; Westside Hurling Walls; housing regeneration scheme.
Issues were discussed, and Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Councillors queries,
and indicated that he would revert with updates on issues including the hurling walls, and
Barna Lough/ Rusheen. Mr U. Finn responded to Transport and Infrastructure-related queries.
5
He indicated consultation with the National Transport Authority is underway regarding a
number of issues raised. Mr G. McMahon responded to Councillors queries regarding
resources required to open the museum 7 days a week in winter. Mr B. McGrath indicated
that a report on the Salmon Weir Bridge will be brought before Council in early 2019.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed a motion to request the Coke Bike scheme be extended to Salthill.
Mr. U. Finn indicated that use of the scheme had increased by 75% last year, with the
expansion of stations in Galway City. There was no plan by the NTA to further expand the
scheme in 2018. It was always envisaged that the scheme would extend to Salthill, but it has
to be planned and managed to ensure the scheme works effectively. A future expansion is
planned by the National Transport Authority, and Salthill could be proposed as part of this
expansion. Mr. B. McGrath advised that the expansion was not likely to be in place in May
2019, but the motion would be pursued in any case.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
That Galway City Council request that the Coke Bike Scheme to be extended to Salthill and
Knocknacarra with immediate effect and ensure it is operable by May 1 2019.
In Favour: 11 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 11
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. O. Crowe proposed to pass a motion regarding floodlighting in council facilities. This was
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell, however it was agreed to wait to vote until item 4(f) was
discussed.
Proposed: Cllr. O. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
That Galway City Council prioritises the current recreational and amenity facilities across
the city in relation to floodlighting fund throughout the three electoral areas with
immediate effect.
The Motion was deferred.
(d) Draft Waste Segregation Bye-Laws —
Not Considered.
6
3. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS FROM COMMITTEES
(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 6th September 2018
Not Considered.
(b) Proposals submitted as agreed by Housing SPC:
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell on behalf of Housing SPC
Date Received: 20th September 2018
"That Galway City Council's Housing SPC call on the Minister for Housing Eoghan Murphy
and Richard Bruton T.D. Department of Education to work with NUIG and GMIT to develop
a programme to provide purpose built, publicly funded student accommodation"
Not Considered.
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard on behalf of Housing SPC
Date Received: 20th September 2018
'tl propose this Housing SPC contact Minister Richard Bruton and request a review of the
third level student grant as current levels are not sufficient in supporting students when
sourcing suitable accommodation".
Not Considered.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b) River Basin Management Plan for Ireland — To receive an update.
Not considered.
(c) Chief Executive's Report December 2018
Not considered.
(d) Regeneration/Refurbishment of City Centre Pedestrianised Area
Mayor McNelis proceeded to take item 4 (d) on Regeneration/ Refurbishment of City Centre
Pedestrianised Area.
A report was presented by Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer, Galway City Council. The
report outlined the scope of the project, and initial works replacing the bollards around the
Pedestrianised Areas.
Mr. B. Downes, Director, Tobin Engineering and Mr. K. Mitchell, Planning and Landscape
Architect, Cunnane Stratton Reynolds also presented. Mr. B. Downes and Mr. P.
Cunningham, Associate Director, Tobin Engineering, conducted a desktop study, on- street
investigations, and a survey of vehicular access to Shop Street in order to propose a phased,
pilot project to enhance the City Centre Pedestrianised Area. Mr. K. Mitchell reported on
7
potential surfacing for the area, which would be informed by the pilot project, and through
consultation.
The regeneration/ refurbishment will also include other enhancements such as wayfinding
and signage.
Mayor Mc Nelis left the meeting at 5.05pm, with Cllr. D. Lyons taking the Chair. Mayor
McNelis returned to Chair the meeting at 5.07pm.
Mayor McNelis thanked the speakers for their presentations. Queries from Councillors were
invited.
Councillors' queries, comments and clarifications included the following:
Acknowledgement that the project was extremely important for the city; scheduling of the
project and the possibility of running 24/7; concerns re costs; inappropriate access by
private cars and through traffic to Shop Street at present; surfacing options; access of
cyclists and HGVs; inclusion of the Latin Quarter in consultations; restrictions on trucks
based on weight; introduction of loading bays in pedestrian areas; access for those with
mobility issues; licencing for canopied eating/ service areas in front of businesses; updating
bye-laws, including removal of cars from pedestrianised areas; enforcement by community
wardens; the role of the liaison officer for the project and the importance of
communications; changing the delivery time to end at loam; catering to business needs in
the area; solutions used in other similar cities including electric delivery vehicles; and
discharge of fats/ oils/ greases in drains.
Cllr. J. Walsh thanked the Manager for pushing this project forward and welcomed the
report.
Mr. U. Finn and Mr. J. Callan responded comprehensively to queries. Mr. U. Finn indicated
that significant liaison is underway with Irish Water regarding works 'under the surface'.
Issues raised in the redevelopment of Eyre Square are informing the rollout of this project,
with a trial beginning in early 2019. Aspects to be managed include utilities, events,
pedestrian access, shopping and busking among others — the trial will resolve much of same
and guide on direction of the rest of the regeneration/ refurbishment. Costs for the trial are
gone to tender, and will give a guide to costs for the full works. This will be used to mitigate
risks. The timeframe for delivery will be established through the tender, and may propose
off-peak works. This is to be confirmed. Mr. B. McGrath indicated that 24/7 works would not
be possible without closing down the street. The Liaison Person would have an important
role liaising with businesses about the project.
Mr. Finn welcomed the support of the Councillors to explore restrictions on access to the
pedestrianised area, and who has/ should have access to the area will be developed further.
Bye laws may need to be introduced to include full use of the streets. Examples from other
cities will be explored, in addition to previous visits by Mr. J. Callan to Waterford, Limerick
Kilkenny and Cork. Mr. U. Finn advised Councillors that the initial temporary surface which
would be put in place would be macadam, as part of trialling effective solutions for soft
8
ground issues. This will be purely to address safety and water issues, and would be
permanently reinstated with an appropriate surface in due course.
Mr. J. Callan indicated that Irish Water had undertaken significant underground works
recently on a culvert in the area, desilting and cleaning it. Further significant works
underground would be required before starting works on the surface. A supplier is due to be
appointed to install hostile-vehicle-resistant bollards with twin bollard locations. This is
heavy civil engineering which is included in the trial.
Ms. N. Moggan advised that funding of €2.7m had been set aside in reserve for this project
over the past number of years. Further IPB funding was earmarked for future, giving approx.
€4.5m for the project. Mr. U. Finn advised that the trial will be used to develop the project
plan and costing. Funding can then be sought through the Urban Regeneration
Development Plan, which could lead to a significant purse of funding. It is proposed that
Galway City Council would make an application in February 2019. Maintenance of existing
pavement would continue as usual during the project.
Mr. B. McGrath acknowledge Councillors' concerns that the project be done well, and
indicated that the project would be good news for the city centre, with rolling upgrades to
make the city a 21st Century City Centre, that is both pedestrian and business friendly. Mr. B.
McGrath indicated that it would be 2021 when the project would finish, as works would
have to facilitate business and events, including Galway2020. Public consultation would be
front and central, to deliver the best outcome possible with benefits including public phone
charging, lighting, street furniture, and way finding. The project will not be an easy project,
and will cause disruption, but City Council and contractors would work to minimise the
disruption.
(e) Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF)
Not considered.
(f) Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (DTTAS)
Not considered.
(g) Bruach na Coiribe, 1916 Commemoration Arch
Not considered.
(h) Estate Management Strategy 2019 - 2023
Not considered.
(i) Update on transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of Mercy to Galway City Council.
Not considered.
9
5. NOTICES OF MOTIONS
NOM 16/16 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the
Marine to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local
fisherman and the harbour authorities".
Not considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Members of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth
Affairs, Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to
ensure that children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with
decent pay and conditions for professional in the sector. Early Years professionals are
hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children during the most crucial
years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care and
education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are
struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on
Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare".
Not considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines
for enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are
automatically excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an
al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are
given to young people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place
is as inclusive as possible"
Not considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 26th January 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh
ar an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil
né ar a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a
chur chun cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not considered.
10
NOM 9/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency
and in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35%
between 2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann
so that the company can continue to provide essential public transport services
throughout rural Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years".
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in
establishing a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and
opportunities".
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on
free to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such
matches. This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish
culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with
significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 25th September, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the
a propriate bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the
11
following housing estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh
Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road,
Galway"
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd October, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting
settlement of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade, Mr. Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise
the State of Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not considered.
NOM 8/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the
HSE to review the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in
chronic pain, outside those experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the
pre-december status while this review is being undertaken."
Not considered.
NOM 9/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor
spend to direct hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they
require a profit and VAT charge it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the
outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not considered.
12
NOM 10/18 Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of
the indigenous people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their
fundamental rights and has refused to comply with international law; noting also that
Israel continues to illegally occupy and colonise Palestinian land, discriminates against
Palestinian citizens of Israel, imposes an inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza and denies
Palestinian refugees the right to return to their homes, Galway City Council fully supports
and endorses the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement for
freedom, equality and justice and commits itself to discontinue all business contracts it
has with Hewlett-Packard, both HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise for business and
government services, as well as the HP spin-off DXC Technology as HP and DXC provide
and operate much of the technology infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its system
of apartheid and settler colonialism over the Palestinian people.
Not considered.
NOM 11/18 Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on
students, and on the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also -
Agrees that increased housing for students will relieve demand on housing across the city;
and also -Recognises the need for additional housing to serve the city's student
population; and further -Calls on the minister for Housing, Planning and Local
Government for the implementation of limits on increases in student housing rents, in
particular in areas that are designated as Rent Pressure Zones; and -Pending such
regulations, calls on housing providers within the City to limit fee increases for student
housing to the percentage rates allowed for Rent Pressure Zones; and -Directs the Chief
Executive of the Council to forward copies of the motion to the Minister for Housing,
Planning and Local Government, and also to the Minister for Education and Skills. Further
to forward copies to the Presidents of NUIG and GMIT.
Not considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically
demand the Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release
immediately all Falun Gong practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from
detention.
Not considered.
13
NOM
17/18
Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Date Received: 9th October 2018
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City
Development Plan 2017-2023. This motion relates to lands located in Renmore adjacent
to Renmore Road, Galway. The purpose of this motion is to request a variation to the
zoning of 0.05 Hectares (Ha) from 'RA' (Recreation and Amenity) to 'R' (Residential).
The subject lands extend to approximately 0.05 Ha in size and forms part of an overall site
comprising approx. 0.299 Ha (See Figure 1 below). The current Galway City Development
Plan 2017-2023 indicates that the site is zoned part 'R: Residential' and part IRA:
Recreational and Amenity'. The 'R' zoning designation applies to approximately 83% of
the subject site (2477 sqm) while the remaining 17% is zoned 'RA' (510 sqm). Request and
map circulated.
Cllr. D. McDonnell amended NOM 17/18 as follows on 12th November 2018. This Motion
was seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely.
"l request that the Chief Executive prepare a Report pursuant to Planning Act 2018 to
consider a variation of the City Development Plan at land as per Motion 17/18 to allow
development of housing.
Not considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 19th November 2018
That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Balinfoile Park to
ascertain the number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and
bring forward plans/options to eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates.
Not considered.
NOM 21/18 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 19th November 2018
That Galway City Council inspect the sewers in Balinfoile Park and carry out remediation
work as there is an ongoing problem for residents with overflowing sewerage.
Not considered.
14
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18 Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard
to the Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of
these meetings and what are the long term plans of UCH?
Not considered.
Q 4/18 Question given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
1st November 2018
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old
Seamus Quirke Rd at the entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by
this council in 2015 to this effect but no update has been given since.
Not considered.
Q 5/18 Question given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 1st November 2018
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as
discussed at our area LIS meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not considered.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Mayor Mc Nelis proposed to note correspondence. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
(a) Correspondence received from Rohingya Action Ireland, Carlow College — St.
Patrick's on 21st November 2018- Noted.
(b) Correspondence received from President of Ireland, Michael D Higgins on 23rd
November 2018- Noted.
(c) Correspondence received from Stephen Cunningham on 22nd November 2018 -
Noted.
(d) Invitation from The Rector and the Select Vestry of St. Nicholas' Collegiate Church,
Galway to the Annual Civic Carol Service on Sunday 16th December 2018 — Circulated
December 2018.- Noted.
15
8. CONFERENCES
Conferences & Training were proposed by Cllr. N. McNelis and seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan and
approved.
1) Title: 'The Finance Act 2018'
Date: 11th to 13th January 2019
Venue: Carlingford, Co. Louth
2) Title: Understanding the Asylum Process in Ireland
Date: 18th, 19th & 20th January 2019
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
3) Title: Retirement Entitlements and Taxation Benefits for Councillors
Date: 25th to 27th January 2019
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Approved Training
1) Title: The Institute of Professional Training
Councils) Bill 2018
Date: 14th, 15th & 16th December 2018
Venue: Whitford Hotel, Wexford
— Local Govt. (Restoration of Town
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Peter Keane, Cllr.
Billy Cameron, Cllr. Mark Lohan, Cllr. Declan McDonnell & Cllr. Michael Crowe.
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Denis Molloy, R.I.P.
Mrs. Marian Curran, R.I.P.
Mr. Gay Walsh, R.I.P.
The Mayor and Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those
recently bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Cllr. P. Conneely
16
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty proposed that the January 2019 meeting start at 2pm. This was seconded
by Cllr. P. Conneely.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
Proposal that the January 2019 Ordinary Council Meeting start at 2pm.
In Favour: 6 Against: 5 Abstain: O Present: 11
The Motion was passed.
The meeting ended at 6.40pm.
M
e
d & Signa
Mayr
17
