Minutes of the Ordinary January Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 11th January, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Councillor F. Fahy
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a
moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed Councillors to the first meeting of the New Year and proposed a
demonstration of sympathy to the Council's friend and colleague, Cllr. Frank Fahy on the
passing of his beloved wife, Gerardine. He extended his sympathies to their three children
Aishling, Aaron, and Sean and to Ger's mother, her sisters, and her brother. The Mayor also
extended his deepest sympathy to Aisling and Aaron's partners Eoin and Sadhbh and the
extended Fahy and Nestor families and all those who are grieving after being so positively
affected by meeting Ger throughout her life.
Mayor Cubbard added that he knew Ger on a personal level, long before he was elected to the
Council "l know that her infectious smile, her warmth and her positive outlook will be sorely
missed by so many. Ger, like so many others who have seen their partner serve as Mayor, was
one of those people who did trojan work for this city behind the scenes when supporting Frank
and I know she was very proud to do so. She has left us far too early; she will be missed. May
she now rest in peace."
Councillors individually and collectively on behalf of their parties; government colleagues;
former Councillors and friends from Menlo and Bushypark offered their condolences and spoke
kind words about the late Mrs. Fahy. The Chief Executive on his own behalf and on behalf of
the staff team extended his condolences to Cllr. Fahy and his family.
Under Standing order no. 25 as a demonstration of sympathy, Mayor Cubbard proposed the
adjournment of the meeting to Monday 18th January 2021 at 3 p.m. This was seconded by Cllr.
D. Lyons and agreed. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a h-anam dilis.
The meeting ended at 3.15 p.m.
Min e Confi d & Signa
/$430
Mayor of Galway
1
DRAFT Minutes of the January Adjournment Meeting of Galway City
Council held virtually on Monday 18th January, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Councillor F. Fahy
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
. P. Staunton, Executive Planner
Mr
E. Verling, Museum Director
Ms.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
M. Curran, Senior Resident Engineer
Mr.
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
Mayor Cubbard commenced the January adjournment meeting and welcomed all to the
meeting. He advised that he proposed to take the agenda as set out. This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th December 2020
The Mayor invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to a query he raised regarding agenda item 4(a) and a previous motion
that Sports grants proposals come before Council to approve rather than for noting and he
sought clarification on the matter.
Cllr. C. Connolly advised that the minute did not record the confirmation that the Council is not
obliged to accept the lowest tender price under agenda item 2(b).
Cllr. D. McDonnell noted a proposal which was to hold a meeting on 215t December 2020 and
not 21st January 2021, as noted.
2
Mr. G. McMahon Meetings Administrator confirmed that having reviewed minutes of previous
Council meetings there was no record of a motion referring to the approval of Sports grants.
He cited his recollection that Sports grants were noted. He added that in relation to
procurement, the Council tender for the most economically advantageous tender, which may
not necessarily be the lowest price tender depending on criteria that is accepted.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th December 2020.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Consideration of Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as
amended) Ref. No. LA3/2020 Galway City Museum proposed development
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services and Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner gave an overview
of the proposed development at Galway City Museum.
The Councillors discussed the proposal and individual matters raised included: possibility of
artefacts based in the National museum that may be more appropriately located in Galway;
consideration of the public realm where the works are proposed; clarifications in regarding the
introduction of fees at the museum post construction and if this was a condition for funding
from Fåilte Ireland; the siting of the ESB box and substation and prevention of vandalism to the
facility; location of loading bays and access for exhibitions; general accessibility; queries about
accessibility ; bin storage; illegal parking at front of the museum; query as to why footpath is
proposed at minimum width; clarification regarding the impact of these works on the old city
walls; the period of time for works to be completed.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to a previous motion that she proposed and was passed that the
facade of substations be in stone. Mr. Barrett advised that it is intended the cladding of the
sub-station would match the facade of the existing Museum building and the access doors
would use materials to correspond with the cladding of the new extension building.
Mr. P. Staunton and Mr. B. Barrett responded to queries and clarifications raised by Councillors.
Mr. Barrett confirmed that a full report on the Museum extension project will be presented to
the Council following the completion of the Tendering process for construction.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to put forward two motions submitted by Cllr. J. Connolly to
Council for consideration:
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
That all Part VIII planning proposals would be uploaded to an online planning platform on the
City Council's website
This was agreed.
3
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Galway City Council expresses its appreciation to the estate of Garech Dé Brün of Luggala
estate for the bequeathment of the 17th Century Dominic Brown Doorway to the people of
Galway. We wish to thank estate project manager Tony Boylan and Seamus Hayes for their
work in locating and transferring the doorway to Galway.
This was agreed and adopted.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that in order to prevent illegal parking to the front of the museum
that this matter be considered as part of the part 8 proposed development. This was seconded
by Cllr. M. O'Connor. Following advice from the Chief Executive that these were two separate
processes, Cllr. C. Connolly withdrew the motion.
Mayor Cubbard put forward the motion to adopt Item 2(a)
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
2(a) Approval of Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) Ref.
No. LA3/2020 Galway City Museum proposed development.
This was agreed and adopted.
2(b) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2021
Councillors discussed the Annual Services Delivery Plan (ASDP) and individual matters raised
included: current Government level 5 restrictions; option to remote work for some staff; review
of parking byelaws; welcome a five year delivery plan; transport BusConnects Cross-City Link
and a difficulty in getting larger maps; suggestion to make a submission regarding the Council's
experience of affordable housing including the clawback clause and a submission that a portion
of Approved Housing Bodies housing should be affordable housing; update on burial ground
potential site on the Dublin Road; reference to the Electoral Register Commission and
Councillor input; access to civic spaces; update on the Galway - Dublin greenway process and
if reliant on URDF funding; request for a progress review on the ASDP in six months; former St.
Anne's at Lenaboy Castle; City Branding initiative; clarification on the change management unit;
park and ride allocated sites status including the potential use of Carnmore airport site; update
on URDF application; need for an affordable housing mix; social inclusion; query regarding
projects not delivered extended into 2021; redevelopment of Claddagh and temporary
helicopter landing at South Park; discussion on infill sites and land zonings; bus shelters and
GMIT expansion into Murrough.
The Director of Services Ms. R. McNally, Mr. D. Mahon and Mr. B. Barrett responded to
Councillors queries and clarifications relevant to their respective areas. The Chief Executive
stepped through the process in preparing the ASDP. He acknowledged the efforts of the staff
of the City Council and the challenges faced due to the impact of COVID-19. He cited the
increasing number of COVID cases and hospital admissions in the West region and the duty of
care to protect staff. He added that some work programmes have been impacted including
4
some construction projects due to Government restrictions. The Chief Executive advised that
as part of the City Development Plan display later in 2021 land use zoning maps will be available
to individual Councillors, as requested.
As the time was approaching 5.00 p.m. Cllr. M. O'Connor proposed the following:
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O'Connor Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
That the balance of the agenda be considered at an adjourned virtual Council meeting at 3p.m.
next Monday 25th January 2021.
Councillors discussed various options for the holding of an adjournment meeting either in a
physical space or virtually.
The Chief Executive advised the meeting of current Public Health Medical Officer and HSE
advice which is to avoid face to face meetings unless essential and urgent.
Cllr. N. Larkin proposed an amendment to the motion. In line with Standing Orders, the
amendment is taken first. Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call
vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Larkin Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
'Proposal to continue the meeting following a 15 minute break should the parties that are
physically present in the Council Chamber have the wherewithal to socially distance in separate
rooms'.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley,
Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis &
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 12 Against: 5 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Amendment was approved.
In line with standing order, the approved amendment becomes the motion for consideration.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote on the motion:
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Larkin Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
'Proposal to continue the meeting following a 15 minute break should the parties that are
physically present in the Council Chamber have the wherewithal to socially distance in separate
rooms.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley,
Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
5
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly
In Favour: 15 Against: 1
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O
Present: 16
Mayor Cubbard adjourned the meeting at 5.05 p.m. to reconvene at 5.20 p.m.
The meeting reconvened at 5.21 p.m.
Following debate by Councillors on items to be considered. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed the following:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To consider and note Item 2(b), take item 2(c) and the meeting conclude.
This was agreed.
Councillor D. Lyons referred to the fact that the Council are awaiting instructions from the
Department regarding affordable housing and proposed the following motion:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
That the executive write to the Minister to expedite affordable housing.
This was agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Item 2(b) - To note the Annual Service Delivery Plan 2021, as proposed
This was agreed and noted.
2(c) Filling of vacancy of chair of Transport Strategic Policy Committee following resignation by
Cllr. E. Hoare.
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed that Cllr. F. Fahy replace him as Chair of the Transportation SPC. He
thanked Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services, Ms. A. Ruane, Administrative Officer and the team
for their assistance over the last 18 months.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Propose that Cllr. F. Fahy replace him as Chair of the Transportation SPC.
This was agreed and adopted.
Mayor Cubbard declared Cllr. F. Fahy as Chair of the Transportation SPC and wished him well in his
new role. Mayor Cubbard thanked Cllr. E. Hoare for his time as Chair.
6
The holding of an adjournment Council meeting was discussed by Councillors and a number
of options and considerations were discussed.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
To hold a virtual adjournment meeting at 3 p.m. on Monday 25th January 2021 with a 1 hour 55
minute duration commencing with agenda item 4(a) and that a Procedures Committee meeting
be held in advance of the February Ordinary Council meeting so that any amendments may be
considered for incorporation into Standing Orders.
This was agreed and adopted.
The meeting concluded at 5.46 p.m.
DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
held virtually on Monday 25th January, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Councillor F. Fahy
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
Ms.
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
Ms.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
. E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
MS.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Mayor Cubbard opened the meeting at 3 p.m. and proposed an adjournment to 3.15 p.m. to
allow for the completion of a HSE briefing from the Saolta University Healthcare Group to
Councillors. This was seconded by Cllr. M. O'Connor and agreed.
Mayor Cubbard recommenced the meeting at 3.15 p.m. with Agenda item 4(a).
7
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Water Framework Directive — Presentation on the EPA Water Quality Report
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services advised that Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer would
outline the main body of the EPA water quality report with some specific issues relating to
Galway city.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne began the presentation with a short video titled 'Water Quality in Ireland 2013
- 2018' prepared by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) which outlined the benefits of
good water quality; water quality in Ireland; how is water quality assessed; main findings for
rivers; lakes; estuaries; coasts and groundwater; significant pressures; main findings; increasing
river nutrient concentration and the River Basin Management Plan. Ms. Kilcoyne continued the
presentation titled 'EPA Water Quality Report - Water Quality in Galway City/ which covered
current water quality status in the Galway city local authority boundary; changes in water
quality in Galway between 2015 and 2018; pressures; the protection and restoration of good
status waterways such as the River Corrib and the value of water sources and future measures
going forward.
Councillors discussed the presentation and matters raised included: phosphate and nitrate
issues nationally; flood mitigation issues and consideration of hydro-morphology; issues at a
number of locations including Claddagh basin and South Park beach; request for a report on
Ballyloughane and all works completed to date; query if a study has been completed on an
alleged contamination to a stream in Merlin woods which was raised at an Environment SPC;
Grattan Road; Knocknacarra/Clybaun streams; Sandy Road river; disposal of fats and greases;
Terryland; request for more information in the form of raw data and locations; relationship and
collaboration with Galway County Council to prevent pollution; educational programmes; Silver
Strand; reference to the Journal; invasive species including Japanese knotweed and zebra
mussels.
A Report that was sent from An Taisce to the EPA prior to Christmas citing alleged discharges
of wastewater containing untreated sewage entering the River Corrib and Galway Bay was
raised and discussed. Also, the reporting of individual incidences to the EPA.
The Chief Executive advised that he had no consultation or contact from An Taisce on this
document. He confirmed that any queries from Councillors will be responded to.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne and Ms. E. Fanning responded to queries raised in detail. Ms. Kilcoyne referred
to clean ups completed by the Environment department and confirmed that she will provide a
map outlining the two streams being sampled in the Lough Rusheen area.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Request for a Report on Ballyloughane including wider issues and the works completed by the City
Council since July 2014.
This was agreed.
8
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
That Galway City Council Environmental Quarterly Reports include the EPA published status of
water quality at testing stations along Rivers within the Galway City Council functional areas on
the day of publication.
This was agreed.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services advised that a number of reports have been requested
by Councillors and will be prepared. Some reports may go to Strategic Policy Committee in the
first instance and additional time may be required to compile data while working with other
agencies in some instances to complete same.
4(b) City Development Plan - Strategic Issues Paper - a public consultation document
prepared to inform and support the public consultation process which commences on the
07/01/21 as part of the review the City Development Plan 2017-2023 and the preparation of
a new City Development Plan for the period 2023-2029
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner gave Councillors an overview of the Strategic Issues paper 'Our
City, Our Future' and the public consultation process for the preparation of the Galway City
Development Plan 2023-2029, which commenced on 7th January 2021. She advised that the
City Council is inviting all members of the public and stakeholders to have their say on Galway
cities future growth. The Issues Paper has been prepared to prompt discussion and
engagement around key themes and issues that are important to the protection of amenity
and heritage and the future direction of development.
Ms. Phelan confirmed that the process is very open, advising that a workshop will be given to
Councillors with a tentative date of Wednesday 3rd February 2021. As there is no facility to
meet directly with the public currently every endeavour is being used to encourage
engagement including by email, telephone and virtual meetings. In addition it was confirmed
that a specific web consultation portal has been set up for the development plan also. She
added that virtual meetings will take place with the Galway City Community Network, Local
Community Development Committee and other organisations, focused groups and
stakeholders. Ms. Phelan confirmed that a summary of the issues raised during the consultation
and the CE's opinion on these issues will be included in a Chief Executive's Report that will be
due for circulation to Councillors in April 2021. The document is available to view and download
online or by appointment at the Planning Section, Galway City Hall. Submissions and
observations are invited up until Friday March 5 2021 which can be made online, by post or e-
mail with more information on the City Council's website www.galwaycitv.ie.
Councillors discussed the Strategic Issues papers and the public engagement was noted and
welcomed, a request was made that an additional advert be published inviting submissions
from the public on their vision for Galway city.
Councillor C. Connolly proposed that Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce
appropriate legislation to permit public access to Zoom Council and sub-committee meetings.
This was seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley
9
Councillors discussed the proposal and Cllr. P. Keane proposed that Council meetings be
webcast or streamed live as provided for under Standing Orders no. 24. This was seconded by
Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Following the proposal of Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. O. Hanley withdrew his seconding of Cllr. C.
Connolly's proposal.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That the matter of public participation and webcasting be considered at the February
Ordinary Council meeting at the outset.
This was agreed.
(c) Chief Executive's Report:
(i) December 2020 - Not Considered
(ii) January 2021 - Not Considered
(d) Review to Renew - Review of the National Development Plan NDP (2018-2027) -
Consultation process" — To hear views of Council for inclusion in submission
Not Considered
(e) Quarterly Report, October to December 2020 - Not Considered
i. Transport & Infrastructure
ii. Housing
iii. Environment & Climate Change
iv. Recreation & Amenity
v. Economic Development & Culture
vi. Community & Sports Development
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising
meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore
effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib.
Not Considered.
NOM 8/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
10
'Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the
hospitality industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.'
Not Considered.
NOM 19/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 24th September 2020
'That GCC call on the Government to extend the Rates Waiver for an additional six months.'
Response issued 8th January 2021.
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended
medals to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat
Quinlan recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have
yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to
make this a priority.
Not Considered.
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
Not Considered.
NOM 22/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That an urgent safety assessment be carried out on Dominick Street and remedial works
be carried out to mitigate danger to the significantly increased number of residents,
particularly families with young children.'
Not Considered.
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
Not Considered.
11
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the City
that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to
encourage people to come into the city.'
Not Considered.
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines
for Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a local
ward will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area committee,
to enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate at which that
portion is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the LPT variation
rate is decided.'
Not Considered.
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling
network across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle
network currently happening across the city'.
Not Considered.
NOM 1/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 2nd January 2021
That Galway City Council would as a matter of urgency install traffic lights at the Clybaun
Road/Shangort Road junction. This junction has become very busy of late with traffic coming
from the Kingston Road direction, exiting Joyce's Supermarket and from the Western
Distributor Road down Clybaun Road. The increased traffic levels has led to a number of
traffic accidents at the junction.
Response issued 8th January 2021.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 1/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: ISt January 2021
'To ask whether the new health restrictions present an opportunity to revisit the case for a
temporary cycle way in Salthill during Covid-19 to encourage healthy outdoor activity,
provide cycle routes to school and work, and make Salthill a must visit location as restrictions
allow. Whether the Transport Section will investigate this potential, particularly for a
temporary two-way cycle route on the coastal side of Salthill which leverages national
fundin . Response issued 8th January 2021.
12
Question 2/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th January 2021
'What measures can be put in place to stop and deter unscrupulous developers and builders
from exploiting the situation of curtailed inspections under level 5 covid restrictions. I
recognise and agree that safety is a priority for staff who would ordinarily carry out
inspections and are unable to visit specific sites internally, but we need to acknowledge that
there are those unfortunately in society that exploit and use these restrictions for personal
gain and favour. Also how will this be followed up on when restrictions are also lifted'.
Response issued 18th January 2021.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Agenda Item 7. was not considered
(a) Correspondence dated 11th December 2020 received from Waterford City & County
Council
(b) Correspondence dated lth December 2020 received from Galway County Council
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None.
9. CONFERENCES
Agenda Item 9. was not considered.
1. Title: Ireland's Housing Conference 2021
Date: 21st January 2021
Venue: Online
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Agenda Item 10. was not considered.
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 5.15 p.m.
13
