Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 11th February 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N.
Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, and J. Walsh.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
Mr
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms
. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS
Councillor T. O'Flaherty
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.00pm with a proposal to suspend Standing Orders, in order to
continue discussions on the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund. The Mayor advised that the Council
Meeting would take a recess after discussions conclude, with the meeting formally recommencing at 3.30pm.
This was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons, and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy and agreed. Discussion on the LSSIF workshop
concluded at 3.19pm.
The Council Meeting recommenced at 3.36pm with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders, followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Mayor proposed to move through the Agenda as follows: I(a) January 2019 Ordinary Meeting Minutes;
I(b) January 2019 Ordinary Meeting - Motion to Revoke Resolution of Monday 23rd May 2005; 4(e) Update on
transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of Mercy to Galway City Council; 2(a) Audit Committee, then to
progress through the Agenda in order, for the time remaining.
The Mayor proposed to take a recess at 7.30pm in line with Standing Orders, in order to continue the meeting
until 8.45pm.
11
P age
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
Item 1 (a) (i)
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 14th January 2019
Seconded: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Item 1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 14th January 2019 were
adopted.
The Mayor invited issues of accuracy.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested that the Motion item (NOM 17/18) passed at the January 2019 meeting be added
to the March agenda.
Cllr. M. Lohan requested that a Motion regarding Terryland Forest from the meeting on the 14th of January
2019 be taken without debate.
Cllr. O. Crowe proposed a review of progress at 6.45pm, at which point Council could decide to extend the
meeting to 8.45pm. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
The Mayor agreed to review progress at 6.45pm. If the meeting was to be extended to 8.45pm, a break would
be held at 7.30pm, in line with Standing Orders.
The Mayor proceed to take a Motion submitted by Cllr. M. Lohan regarding parks in Galway City.
The Chief Executive advised that while he was supportive of the motion, the Annual Service Plan as adopted
by Members in January 2019 had agreed priority projects for 2019, and did not take account of the resources
required to enact the motion for all parks in the city. Likewise the Budget adopted by Members in December
2018 did not have resources allocated as required.
A discussion ensued on amending the motion. The Chief Executive committed to bring a report to the April
meeting, outlining a methodology and cost to implement the motion. Cllr. M. Lohan agreed to wait for the
report, and leave the original Motion on the table for the March meeting.
Seconded: Cllrs. M. Farrell, C. Ö Conchüir, C. Connolly, N. McNelis,
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
O. Crowe, B. Cameron, N. Larkin, J. Walsh, P. Conneely, D.
McDonnell, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy.
The public amenity parks of Galway City are a unique and valuable resource for all citizens.
A Design Master Plan for their future use, maintenance and infrastructure repair of will commence by the
end of Quarter one 2019, with a preliminary report issued by the end of Quarter 2, 2019.
All stakeholders will have input toward the Design Master Plan.
The reassembly of the Steering Group for Terryland Forrest Park will be part of the process.
Not Considered.
21
Page
Item 4 (j) —
Notice of Motion deferred from Council Meeting of 14th January 2019
The Mayor proceeded to take Item 4 (j) as agreed at the Special Meeting in February.
Comments and queries from Councillors included:
Potential discrimination against social housing clients; Waste Bye Laws.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries and advised that not all holders of waste are required to have a contract
with a waste provider, as per the Bye Laws due to commence on the 18th February 2019. The Mayor noted
that the Motion could proceed through the Housing SPC. Cllr. P. Flannery withdrew the motion.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
All people allocated housing or supported for housing by Galway City Council must show proof within a
period of one month of occupancy of having a contract with a recognised waste disposal/ collection body
for the disposal of household waste once an allocation is made.
The Motion was withdrawn.
Item 1 (a) (ii)
Motion (as per Standing Order 32) — to Revoke Resolution of Monday 23rd May 2005.
Discussion on Item 1 (a) (ii) took place.
Queries and comments from Councillors included:
Review of other recipients of the Freedom of the City; Correspondence from Mayor at the time; recognition
of incidences of genocide; consideration of who receives the Freedom and their direct link to Galway City;
removal of Freedom by other Cities.
The Chief Executive clarified that there is no provision in Local Government legislation to remove the
Freedom of the City. Instead, Council could use their discretion under Standing Orders to revoke a resolution
previously made.
Proposed: Mayor N. McNelis Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
Motion to Revoke Resolution (herewith) of Monday 23rd May 2005
"FREEDOM OF THE CITY:
In accordance with standing order no. 97 issues associated with the proposal by the Mayor, Cllr.
Catherine Connolly to confer the Freedom of the City on Aung San Suu Kyi (Burmese pro-democracy
leader) were discussed in Committee and it was resolved that the Freedom of the City be conferred on
her."
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: 2 Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor advised that a motion related to Item 1 (a) (ii) had been tabled for consideration, by Cllr. C.
Connolly. Mr. G. McMahon read the motion as presented.
31
Page
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllrs. M. Lohan, M. Farrell, C. Ö Conchüir, B. Cameron, P. Keane,
M. Cubbard, O. Crowe, D. Lyons, N. McNelis.
That GCC calls on the UN Security Council to approve a referral to the International Criminal Court calling
for the military to be held accountable for genocide and other international crimes, following a UN report
in August 2018, which outlines state violence against an ethnic and religious minority in the country known
as the Rohingya that has led to the death of an estimated 25,000 thousand people and the exodus of more
than 700,000 to Bangladesh since August 2017. The report also includes crimes of murder, rape, torture,
sexual slavery, persecution and enslavement.
Furthermore that GCC condemns the failure of Aung San Suu Kyi leader of Myanmar to protect and
safeguard the safety of the Rohingya Community — and condemns outright the Human Rights Violations
and treatment of the Rohingya people as evidenced by the UN investigators.
GCC calls on Aung San Suu Kyi to recognise their ethnic status and introduce citizenship to the Rohingya
people —a Muslim minority in Myanmar, where they are currently denied and considered illegal immigrants
from neighbouring Bangladesh, despite calling the Rakhine state home for generations.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: 2 Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Item 1 (b)
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 4th February 2019.
Mr. G. McMahon advised Members that the heading on the Draft Minutes circulated had a typo, and would
be amended to read 'Special Meeting'.
Cllr. F. Fahy requested that the report on the number of families being catered for in 2015 and 2018 be
circulated to Members, as per the Draft Minutes. Mr. D. Mahon advised that this would be done in the
coming week.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Item 1 (b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 4th February 2019 were
adopted.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested an update on motions passed at Council Meetings. The Mayor advised Cllr.
Connolly to take this up with the Executive by email.
4 IP age
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Item 4 (e)
Update on transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of Mercy to Galway City Council
Queries and comments from Councillors included:
URDF funding; costs to secure/ renovate the Castle; role of former residents; archaeological report; timeline
for fit out; governance; access for Irish language groups; mindfulness; Redress Scheme; use of the Castle
until funding secured; sale of the Castle; planning; size of the site; operators of the centre; removal of
modern extensions.
The Chief Executive responded to Members queries comprehensively. He summarised the geophysical
survey conducted in late 2018 for the record:
The geophysical surveys conducted for this report have identified a number of anomalous
features within the grounds of Lenaboy Castle. A number of potential structure remains were
identified as well as a number of zones of possible rubble remains. These zones could represent
construction debris, former structural remains, or geological deposits.
Three pipes or service cables were also detected running from Lenaboy Castle. Numerous small
isolated responses were also detected across the survey area. These appear in multiple amplitude
slices (depths) and generally have a length of between 0.5m and 2m. These isolated responses
have been interpreted as possible buried features as they contrast with the surrounding sub-soil.
The anomalies may be associated with buried deposits, large stones contained within the sub-soil
or soil disturbance, possibly associated with burials or vegetation removal".
A subsequent archaeological dig was commissioned, with conclusions circulated. The report goes through 28
trenches, and details what was found in each.
The Chief Executive summarised the report:
. All but Trenches 11, 16 and 21 were excavated without difficultly to natural undisturbed soil.
The tunnel in Trench 11 prevented full excavation of the trench and the nature and depths of the
stone fill in Trench 16 made excavation to natural difficult.
Existing services in Trench 21 made it impossible to excavate further. Apart from the tunnel and
the circular water chamber, no other features of archaeological or historical interest were
discovered and, apart from sherds of post-medieval Blackware, no finds of pre-nineteenth century
date were found.
There was no human bone discovered in any of the trenches. There were no possible interment
sites identified. Nine trenches (Trenches 4, 6-8, 11-12, 16, 27-28) yielded animal bone, some of
which was butchered and all of which had been discarded with modern debris or in re-deposited
fill contexts".
The Chief Executive stated that the report makes clear there is nothing of any concern to Galway City Council
taking ownership of this site. Galway City Council had requested the reports to be done. Unlike Tuam, there
are no human remains on the site. The Sisters of Mercy requested that the reports be circulated, so that it
was clear that there was nothing of concern on the Lenaboy Castle site.
The Chief Executive advised that when the transfer was originally mooted, it was not specified that the
property was being given as part of the Redress scheme, but it had been stated in subsequent draft transfer
documents that the building and site are being transferred under the Ryan Report. The Report on the 7th
December 2018 for the December Ordinary Meeting stated that it was part of the Redress Scheme. An
additional €750,000 would be transferred by the Sisters of Mercy, outside of the Redress Scheme, and would
51 Page
be ringfenced for Lenaboy to bring it back into repair. After being dormant for 7 years, the buildings were in
moderate repair, when last inspected. As the Castle is a listed building, it would be difficult to estimate exact
costs to convert the Castle into a Creative Hub for Children and Young People. An estimate would be in the
region of €4.5 to €5 million, depending on the specification. The €3.5 million originally estimated was the
cost to bring the building into reasonable structural repair.
The Chief Executive had been contacted, on behalf of former residents, about using the Centre as a national
centre for commemoration, but he did not see that as being the role of Galway City Council. However City
Council would work with anyone associated with the former building so that Galway City Council are faithful
to its former use, by the nuns, the HSE and as a residence.
The Chief Executive strongly believes that Galway City Council should take ownership of the building and
that this is a 'good news' story for Galway and its young people. He advised that subject to the transfer
proceeding, Galway City Council would pursue funding to complete the project. In the interim, the building
would be secured, weatherproofed and maintained with funding transferred from the Sisters of Mercy. The
Chief Executive would request the conditions on use be amended to include 'other educational-type uses',
which would open up other funding avenues. The building and site will not be utilised as a national, regional,
or local commemorative centre.
The Chief Executive advised that the building could not be sold on, and it was the intention of Galway City
Council to secure key organisations for young people in the city as anchor tenants. He invited Councillors to
visit the site with him, so they could see the space and what could be done.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Mayor N. McNelis
Motion to proceed with the proposed transfer of Lenaboy Castle from the Sisters of Mercy to Galway City
Council.
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor noted a problem with the Wi-Fi, and advised Councillors that it was being addressed by IT staff as
a matter of urgency.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Item 2 (a) Audit Committee
(i) Consideration of Audit Committee Report for 2018;
(ii) Review of Audit Committee Charter;
(iii) Adoption of Audit Committee Work Programme for 2019.
61
Page
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Item 2 (a) Audit Committee
(i) Consideration of Audit Committee Report for 2018;
(ii) Review of Audit Committee Charter;
(iii) Adoption of Audit Committee Work Programme for 2019.
The Audit Committee Reports were adopted.
The Mayor invited questions on the Audit Committee reports.
Queries and comments from Councillors included:
Shared services; Value for money; minutes on the website; staff vehicles; fines; protected disclosures.
Councillors acknowledged of the work of the Audit Committee members.
Ms. N. Moggan advised Members that the report presented was an overview report from the Audit Committee
only, and was not the report issued by the Local Government Auditor. The Meetings Administrator, Mr. G.
McMahon, advised that the minutes of meetings cannot be published until agreed by the Members. All reports
are in draft form until they are considered by Council, and then they can be made public. Consideration would
be given to the proposal to publish more reports on the website, subject to the capacity of the website to host
them.
The Chief Executive advised that the 2017 audit report for Galway City Council was very positive, and that he
would bring a report on Shared Services to Council in due course. He advised Members that they have a duty
to report any irregularities if they are aware of any such issues.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a motion that Galway City Council make available to the public and place on the
website all agenda items and reports to be discussed by Councillors. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell.
The Chief Executive recommended that documents were published after they had been considered by
Members.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed an amendment to the motion, to leave arrangements as they are.
Proposed: Cllr. D.McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Crowe
To amend the motion to leave arrangements for publication of Council documentation as they are at
present.
In Favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was passed and became the Substantive Motion.
Members voted on the substantive motion.
Proposed: Cllr. D.McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Crowe
To leave arrangements for publication of Council documentation as they are at present.
In Favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 16
The substantive motion was adopted.
71 Page
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS BY OFFICIALS
Item 4 (a)
Galway City Centre Traffic Management Plan
Mr. U. Finn presented a report on the Galway City Centre Traffic Management Plan, focusing on the three
elements: City Centre Access Link; Inner City Access Route; Cross City Link.
At 5.43pm, Deputy Mayor, Cllr. D. Lyons assumed the Chair. At 5.51pm, The Mayor returned as Chair.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested maps with a larger font size be circulated to Members.
Questions from Councillors included:
Shantalla neighbourhood park; HSE helipad; parking at the hospital; one way routes/ bus corridors at
Bohermore, Lough Atalia and College Road; workshops; timelines; costings; inclusion of Barna/ Moycullen/
Oranmore; Park and Ride in West city; yellow boxes; congestion; 'quick fixes'; Menlo bus route; Circular Road;
distance from bus stops; bus corridor on Tuam Road; culture change re use of public transport; EIS; access for
residents on Canals; Outer Ring Road; Public Realm Strategy; access for disabled; Christmas Park and Ride;
Emergency Department in UCHG; Brown roundabout.
At 6.15pm, The Mayor queried if Members would like to break, or continue and review at 6.45pm. Members
agreed to continue to 6.45pm.
Mr. U. Finn responded comprehensively to Councillors queries. He advised that the Browne Roundabout is on
a National Route, and as such is a strategic transport route. Therefore Phase 1 includes improvements to
pedestrian crossings and Phase 2 relating to subsequent removal of the Browne Roundabout will be brought
forward in consultation with Til. Local access will be retained to College Road but not through traffic. Only
public transport vehicles can use College Road as through traffic. The proposed cross city link would introduce
high quality priority for the five bus route across the City Centre, joining existing bus priority between the
Seamus Quirke Road and the Dublin Road and linking along the route, the hospital with the City Centre and
the train station and regional and intercity bus services. One-way systems previously in place as part of works
on Lough Atalia Road reduced traffic delays on Lough Atalia and College Road as there was less traffic as a
result of the closure under the Lough Atalia Railway Bridge. The closure however caused significant traffic
delays in the west of the city as traffic diverted. Consultation will be undertaken on the GCCTMP with a series
of Workshops including Westside, city centre and the east side. Following consultation, T&l will complete the
GCCTMP design and then bring forward with an implementation plan for each element. Each project will have
modelling similar to those produced for the Kirwan Roundabout upgrade. In relation to the bus provision on
the Circular Road/ Rahoon Road, T&l have been in contact with the NTA who have the remit of licencing the
bus routes. Work was ongoing with UHG management in relation to the provision of a Public Transport (PT)
link through the hospital and its interlinkages with the helipad and the ED building. The Aviation report is to
be finalised. Discussions are underway with a landowner re Park and Ride in the west of the city — Mr. U. Finn
advised that he would revert with an update on same. Potential bus routes into Parkmore are being examined.
In the coming month, T&l would close out on options, and would do an Environmental Assessment on the
scheme, with consultation in relevant areas and an implementation plan developed. The NTA have not yet
announced budgets, but 2019 allocations are due shortly. At this point, detailed reports on individual projects
would be developed. Mr. U. Finn committed to raising enforcement of yellow boxes with the Gardai, as Galway
City Council have no enforcement powers for same. Mr. Finn advised that Christmas Park and Ride figures had
increased from 2017 to 2018.
At 6.45pm, The Mayor invited Members to consider the time of the meeting. Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that
Item 4 (c) be completed. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell and Cllr. N. Larkin.
Mr. B. McGrath reported to Members that since the crash of Rescue 118, the Irish Aviation Authority had
81 Page
increased priority on landing sites for helicopters, taking account of angles of approach, and the increase in
size of helicopters. The helipad at Shantalla is fundamental to UCHG as the primary trauma centre for the West
Coast, for Medivac, including the islands. The hospital proposes to provide land to Galway City Council, with a
pitch to be developed on residual land, which would also include a walkway, and exercise area. Non-statutory
consultation would begin in March. The Strategy would mean the removal of some parking and reversal of
traffic flows in some areas — but would put 77% of the population within IO minutes' walk of a bus route, and
serve 95% of schools in the City, bar Menlo. Real time information and bus shelters would be an integral part
of this, with an additional staff of 7 to be recruited to roll out Bus Connects, with funding from the NTA for the
next 5 years.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed a motion, which was amended on the advice of the Chief Executive.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
The inclusion of bus routes on Circular Road and in Menlo to be considered as part of the Galway City
Centre Transport Strategy.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. C. O'Conchüir Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
That bus shelters would be an integral part of every new bus route.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The motion was passed.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Item 4 (c) be taken. This was seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely.
The Mayor advised that the meeting could finish after consideration of Item 4(c) but it would have to be
extended. According to Standing Orders, a decision could be made at 7.30pm to take a 15 minute break. The
Mayor proceed to take Motions.
Cllr. M. Crowe tabled a motion, which was amended as below.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested clarification from the Chief Executive on passing motions calling on third parties to
do something.
The Chief Executive advised that Members should be sure that the current process is fully exhausted before
passing this motion. It was agreed to defer the Motion until the March meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded: Cllrs. N. McNelis; O. Crowe; M. Lohan; D. Lyons; P. Flannery;
J. Walsh; N. Larkin; P. Keane; D. McDonnell & P. Conneely.
Following last weeks decision by An Bord Pleanala this Council calls on the HSE to immediately source an
alternative site on the grounds of Merlin Park for Galway Hospice.
The motion was deferred to March.
9 | Page
Proposed: Cllr. M. Farrell Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
That this council sends solidarity and support to our nurses and midwives who balloted for strike action
beginning January 30th to demand a safe, fully staffed, functioning health service that values and pays them
as essential skilled workers.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
At 7.30pm, the Mayor proposed to extend the meeting in line with Standing Orders, to consider Item 4(c). The
proposal was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons, and a recess was called.
The meeting resumed at 7.52pm.
Item 4 (c)
Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund
Mr. G. McMahon reported on the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund: The National Sports Policy, published
in July 2018, provided for a Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund (LSSIF). The aim of the fund is to provide
Exchequer support for larger sports facility projects. These would be projects where the Exchequer investment
would be greater than the maximum amount available under the Sports Capital Programme (SPC). In some
cases, these may be projects where the primary objective will be to increase active participation in sport. In
other cases, these may be large scale venues/ stadia where the focus is more related to social participation
and high performance sport. Initially the scheme will have a particular focus on National Governing Bodies of
Sport and Local Authorities. New swimming pool project will also be considered. All project proposals will be
subject to appropriate economic investment.
The Chief Executive advised that Members had heard two proposals in the workshop earlier that day, with a
third proposal to assist Connacht Rugby for consideration also. If Galway City Council wishes to support any of
the proposals, there is a significant body of work to be completed in advance of the April deadline. The Chief
Executive welcomed guidance from Members on how to proceed.
Queries raised by Councillors included:
Number of projects that could be backed; Access to existing facilities at Cappagh Park; Sports Capital Fund;
Location of Cappagh Road project; Prices; access to pools for young people; Connacht Rugby proposal.
The Chief Executive advised that the Rowing Project could seek funding for technical assistance, and then seek
capital funding under the LSSIF. Connacht Rugby have looked to meet regarding their proposal, in a workshop
format as per the other two applications. Galway City Council could support more than one application, but
they must be put in order of merit, as per the Guidelines of the Scheme. Under existing rules, Galway City
Council could not support the Regional Sports Centre proposal without inviting expressions of interest and
proposals in advance of the deadline.
The Mayor proposed to invite Connacht Rugby to participate in a workshop on the LSSIF on Monday 18th
February, at 1.15pm. This was agreed.
10 |
Page
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
N/A
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b)
(d)
(f)
(h)
Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021 — report circulated January 2019. Not Considered.
Christmas Park and Ride. Report Circulated February 2019. Not Considered.
Galway2020 Update. Report Circulated February 2019. Not Considered.
Proposed Prohibition on Election Posters. Report Circulated February 2019. Not Considered.
Chief Executive's Reports:
i) Chief Executive's Report December 2018. Circulated December 2018. Taken as Noted.
ii) Chief Executive's Report January 2019. Circulated January 2019. Taken as Noted.
iii) Chief Executive's Report February 2019. Report Circulated February 2019. Not Considered.
Quarterly Reports for quarter ending 31st December 2018 — circulated January 2019.
i) Environment
ii) Recreation & Amenity
iii) Transportation
iv) Housing
v) Community, Culture and Economic Development
Not Considered.
5. NOTICES OF MOTIONS
NOM 2/17
Notice given by:
Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister Katherine
Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have access to quality,
sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children during the
most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care and education.
However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to make ends meet and
providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality
childcare.
Not considered.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
NOM 4/17
Notice given by:
Date Received: 2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as regards
educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses
means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by
younger people at an at-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives
are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive
as possible".
Not considered.
11 | Page
NOM 9/17
Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing so,
advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the European
Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and 2015 and
calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can continue to provide
essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over
60 years."
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western Development
Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region approach to encourage
new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches broadcast on
channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in order to allow access
for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a
unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with
significant State investment from taxpayer moneV'.
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence as a
matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na
Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilfn located on the Upper
Ballymoneen Road, Galway".
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new criminal offence
for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators".
Not considered.
12 | Page
NOM 9/18
Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct hires. As
contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge it is of direct and
indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the Chinese
Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong practitioners and
other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
19th November 2018
"That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Ballinfoile Park to ascertain the
number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and bring forward plans / options to
eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates"
Not considered.
NOM 01/19 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
28th January 2019
"That Galway City Council consider providing funding in the 2020 budget to finance the provision of dedicated
park wardens in Galway City to ensure that our parks and in particular Terryland Forest Park, Merlin Woods,
Barna Woods, and Crestwood Park are monitored for anti social behaviour, illegal dumping and tree felling."
Not considered.
NOM 02/19 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
30th January 2019
"That this Council reviews the issuing of parking permits in the Claddagh area. This review should include the
cost of the permit and the amount of permits issued to each residence. It should also include the type of
permit issued to carers and people who are visiting the sick."
Not considered.
NOM 03/19 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
31st January 2019
"That this council sends solidarity and support to our nurses and midwives who balloted for strike action
beginning January 30th to demand a safe, fully staffed, functioning health service that values and pays them
as essential skilled workers."
Not considered.
131 Page
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18 Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the Helipad on
the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and what are the long term
plans of UCH?"
Not Considered.
Q 4/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd at the
entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this effect but no update
has been given since.
Not Considered.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our area LIS
meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not Considered.
7. CORRESPONDENCE/ ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION
Items of Correspondence were proposed by Cllr. M. Lohan, and seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin, and were noted.
Items for Councillors Information were proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin, and seconded by Cllr. M.Lohan, and were
noted.
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
Nomination of Elaine Brick, AECOM, to Transport SPC by Galway Chamber — noted.
Local Authority Elected Members Role and Remuneration Review - Completion of Survey by Councillors
— noted.
An Garda Siochåna Policing Plan 2019 letter to Stakeholders — noted.
Submission of Statements and Certification regarding Disclosure of Donations 2018 - Circular F.IO/13 of
16 October 2013, and draft guidelines for elected members on the acceptance and reporting of political
donations - Circular Letter F.01/19 — noted.
Resolution adopted at December 2018 meeting of Monaghan County Council — noted.
Resolution adopted at December 2018 meeting of Adare-RathkeaIe Municipal District of Limerick City &
County Council — noted.
Resolution adopted at January Ordinary Meeting of Sligo County Council, 14th January 2019 — noted.
CSRDN Letter to Galway City Councillors on Freedom of the City Vote, received 3rd February 2019 — noted.
14 |
Page
8. CONFERENCES
Item 8 - Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and were
approved.
1)
2)
3)
4)
1)
2)
3)
Title: Urban Development Conference
Date: 21st February 2019
Venue: Talbot Hotel, Stillorgan, Co. Dublin
Title: Ireland and Plastic Waste
Date: 8th 9th & 10th March 2019
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Title: The Finance Act 2018 Cost Analysis
Date: 22nd, 23rd & 24th March 2019
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Mark Lohan
Title: Community Law & Mediation — Rent Supplement & Housing Assistance Payment
Schemes
Date: 28th March 2019
Venue: Limerick Social Services Centre, Upper Henry Street, Limerick
Approved Training:
Title: LAMA Spring Training Seminar
Date: 7th & 8th March 2019
Venue: The Bush Hotel, Carrick-on-Shannon, Co. Leitrim
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Pearce
Flannery
Title: AILG Annual Training Conference 2019
Date: 21st & 22nd February 2019
Venue: The Longford Arms Hotel, Main Street, Longford
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie
Crowe, Cllr. Noel Larkin & Cllr. Colette Connolly
Title: The Institute of Professional Training — Register of Electors & Boundary Changes
Date: 22nd 23rd & 24th March 2019
Venue: Whitford Hotel, Wexford
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/ CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy (Ordinary Meeting 11th February 2019):
•
•
•
•
John Creaven R.I.P.
Tommy O'Loughlin R.I.P.
Liam Thomas R.I.P.
Mickie Maloney R.I.P.
Patrick Linnane R.I.P.
Clem Bowen R.I.P.
Tommy Curran R.I.P.
Elizabeth (Betty) Lynch R.I.P.
Eamon Carey R.I.P.
Robert Murray R.I.P.
Kathleen Walsh R.I.P.
Paddy Griffin R.I.P.
Votes of Sympathy (Special Meeting 4th February 2019)
• John Creaven
• Tommy O'Loughlin
• Liam Thomas
• Mickie Maloney
Votes of Congratulations (Ordinary Meeting 11th February 2019):
• David Badger
• Keith Badger
Votes of Congratulations (Special Meeting 4th February 2019)
• Galway Firemen - David Badger, Keith Badger
IO. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting closed at 8.46pm.
16 | Page
& Signd
Mayor of Galway