Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 11th March 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P.
Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P.
Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T.
O'Flaherty, and J. Walsh.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
. D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer
Ms. E. Silke, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms. A. Breslin, Assistant Staff Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
N/A
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.00pm with a proposal to suspend Standing Orders, in order
to continue a workshop on the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund. The Mayor advised that the
Council Meeting would formally recommence at 3.30pm. This was proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe, and
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
The Council Meeting recommenced at 3.30pm with a statement of intention to conduct the business
of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders, followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Mayor thanked Members for facilitating the suspension of Standing Orders, and proposed to
progress through the Agenda as follows: Item I(a); 2(a); 2(b) with 4(j); 2(c); 3(a); 3(b) and 4 (d); and
4(c). The Mayor would then take Items 4 (b) (f) (g) (h) (i), and (k).
The Mayor proposed to take a recess at 6.00pm for 20 minutes, and to resume the meeting until
8.00pm. The Mayor advised Members that he needed to leave the meeting for a period, and Deputy
Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons would take the Chair.
Mr. B. McGrath drew Members attention to item 7.2 — Proposals to Modernise the Electoral
Registration Process, noting that the 15th of March 2019 is the deadline for submissions. If Members
wished to make a collective submission, Mr. McGrath recommended reviewing this item at the
Council Meeting.
Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on
Monday 11th February 2019.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 1 —Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 11th February
2019 were adopted.
The Mayor invited issues of accuracy.
Cllr. D. Lyons noted a typo in the time when the Mayor returned to the Chair. Cllr. C. Connolly
advised that she had submitted a number of questions by email regarding Item 4, and understood
responses would issue with the Agenda. Mr. G. McMahon advised that correspondence was sent to
the relevant Directorate, with information to issue from the Directorate. Mr. B. McGrath advised
that only items discussed at the meeting could be addressed, but that a response would be issued.
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
That councillors may submit questions to the Executive for written response in relation to all
Agenda items debated and discussed at City Council Meetings to provide clarity and transparency.
Not considered.
The Mayor noted a problem with the Extranet, and advised Councillors that it was being addressed
by IT staff as a matter of urgency.
Item 2(a) Event Licensing Report for the St Patricks Day Parade under Section
238 of the Planning Act for consideration at the Council meeting of 11th
March 2019
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner, outlined the Event Licence Report for the St Patrick's Day
Parade, under Section 238 of the Planning Act. The application was advertised on ISt February 2019
in the local and national press and was received on the 4th February 2019. The closing date for
submissions was 21st February 2019, three weeks after the public notices. No third party submissions
had been received from members of the public by 21st February 2019.
11
Page
The event entails a Parade from NUIG Quadrangle, University Road, passing over the Salmon Weir
Bridge, through Courthouse Square, Eglinton Street, Williamsgate Street and Eyre Square North,
finishing at Prospect Hill, and involving performers and floats on St Patrick's Day, Sunday 17th March
2019, between the hours of 11.30am and 1.00pm. The event is expected to attract an audience of up
to 30,000, and will be a free non-ticketed event for members of the public.
Queries from Councillors included:
Parking management; Parade Director; updates on Galway City Council website; change of route;
Cross Street/ Shop Street works; flags/ dress code for parade; Litter management; funding for
parade; Community wardens; wheelchair platform; bus diversions; free public transport;
participation of Galway2020; voluntary closure of off licences; mobile toilets; length of route;
notification re change of route; banners on Shop Street; use of schools for park and ride facilities;
and Irish language/ music in the parade.
Clarification was provided in response to queries raised. Mr. L. Blake noted Members'
disappointment re the change in route, but advised Members that the risk of having building
materials and a builders enclosure on the route was too high, with works planned on Shop/ Cross
Street ongoing. Banners would be erected as requested, and Event Organisers would be asked to
look at the inclusion of Irish music/ Irish language. Mr. B. McGrath committed to comprehensive
parking management along the route of the parade, and advised that the parade route could not be
publicised until the event licence was granted by Members.
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
Item 2(a) Proposal to Grant Event Licensing for the St Patricks Day Parade under Section 238 of the
Planning Act.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. M. Cubbard submitted a motion regarding provision of free public transport for St Patrick's Day.
Mr. B. McGrath advised members to make provision for a budget for free public transport or park
and ride in September 2019, with a view to implementing in 2020.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the Executive would look at the costs involved before budget time, and
report on same. Cllr. M. Cubbard amended the original motion. Members voted on the amended
motion, as below.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
I propose Galway City Council explores a free public transport service be provided between the
hours of 10.30 and 14.00 on St Patricks Day to transport people to and from the city centre for the
parade from 2020.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
21 Page
Mr. B. McGrath recommended that the motion would be examined in the wider context of
Galway2020 event planning and provision, with a view to facilitating people to get to and from events
without disruption.
Item 2 (b) Draft Litter Management Plan 2018 — 2022
The Mayor invited Ms. C. Kilcoyne to report on the Draft Litter Management Plan 2018-2022,
Under Section IO of the Litter Pollution Act, 1997, Galway City Council has prepared a new Draft Litter
Management Plan for the period up to 2022. The plan sets out a range of objectives in relation to the
prevention and control of litter, enforcement, together with measures to encourage public
awareness of litter in Galway. The Draft Plan was publicised and available for inspection from 17th
January to 8th February 2019. A total of 6 submissions were received and these have been considered.
The Draft Plan was now being brought to Members for consideration and recommendation.
The Mayor invited clarifications. Queries from Councillors included:
Litter Hot spots; fines issued; cigarette related litter; responsibility for public footpaths; dog fouling;
Local Agenda 21 grants; ballot box trial; fly tipping; engagement with schools; street art; IBAL report;
wardens; enforcement; measures relating to, and cost of, illegal dumping; litter generators; bulky
goods service; plastic waste in retailers; court proceedings; community clean ups; hazardous waste
collections; unauthorised collectors; solar bins; graffiti removal; Best Kept Town Award; tree cutting
in Merlin; CCTV at bottle bins.
At 5.01 the Mayor left the meeting, and Deputy Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne responded to Members queries comprehensively. She advised that the list of 50 'hot
spots' would be circulated to members. Details of the Ballot Bins pilot will follow. Ms. C. Kilcoyne
advised that Galway City Council do not have any authority regarding retailers and plastic waste,
which is managed through Repak scheme. Hazardous Waste collection is being addressed on a
regional basis, with funding being sought to do a collection. Unauthorised collectors are also being
targeted at a regional basis this year. Mr. B. McGrath advised that a Producer Responsibility Scheme
would not be introduced nationally for hazardous waste such as paint. It is very costly to run a
collection, costing for one day. Ms. C. Kilcoyne advised that a policy on graffiti is to
be developed. Approaches to street art would be considered as part of the public realm strategy.
How updates re waste complaints are communicated back to Members would be addressed,
including the complaint log number. Costs for Galway City Council taking a court case for littering
would be clarified.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty submitted a motion regarding the establishment of a pilot checkpoint scheme to
examine compliance with waste collection permits to prevent illegal dumping. Members discussed
the Motion. Mr. B. McGrath advised that the actions proposed in the Motion are included in the
Council's RMCEI Plan with the EPA and would be delivered through this mechanism. Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
withdrew the Motion. Mr. B. McGrath stated that Galway City is a clean, well-presented city, doing a
good job with the resources available, and complies with European litter norms.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
Item 2 (b) Draft Litter Management Plan 2018 — 2022
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
Item 2 (b) Draft Litter Management Plan 2018 — 2022 was adopted.
31
At 5.50pm, the Deputy Mayor proposed that the meeting would recess, and resume at 6.10pm.
The Deputy Mayor clarified the remainder of the Agenda with Item 4 (j) at 6.10pm, followed by 2 (c),
4 (a), 4 (b), 4 (c) and 4 (d).
Before the recess, Mr. B. McGrath notified Members of two weather warnings in place. Mr. B.
McGrath advised Members that although there was currently no risk of major coastal flooding as
advised by the National Coordination Centre, staff would be on standby in case the situation changed.
The meeting went into recess at 5.50pm.
The meeting resumed at 6.14pm, when a quorum of Members was reached.
The Deputy Mayor invited Mr. G. McMahon to report on item 4(j) Proposed Prohibition on Election
Posters.
Item 4(j) Proposed Prohibition on Election Posters.
Mr. G. McMahon advised Members that a motion relating to Election Posters was passed at the
November 2018 Ordinary Meeting, as follows:
"In supporting a cleaner and safer environment, Galway City Council commits to develop and
implement a bye-law prohibiting the use of election posters or the posting of any type of
politically motivated election material on public facilities or in publicly controlled spaces
throughout the Galway City area subject to legal advice".
This motion was referred to Galway City Council's Law Agent for legal advice. A number of statutory
elements refer, including Litter Pollution Act 1997, amended by the Electoral (Amendment) (No. 2)
Act 2009; Protection of the Environment Act 2003; Planning and Development Regulations 2001 as
amended; European Parliament Elections Act 1997; Local Elections Regulations 1995; Referendum
Act 1994 and the Electoral Act 1992. The Litter Pollution Act, 1997 specifically exempts the
distribution of election material and allows for the erection of posters and other material under
particular controls regarding their placement and the periods allowed following the signing of an
election order.
Mr. G. McMahon advised that the Motion as passed in November could not be implemented as a
bye-law, as it was addressed by National legislation. Mr. G. McMahon acknowledged Galway County
Council, which had given permission for a comprehensive reply on the same topic to be circulated.
At present, there are no mechanisms by which the Executive of Galway City Council could enforce a
prohibition on election posters. However Members could agree to a voluntary code.
Cllr. P. Flannery read NOM 06/19, which relates to this Item. Members discussed the motion and the
use of election posters.
Queries raised by Councillors included:
Quantity of signs that will be in use in May; accidents/ insurance; use of other means of advertising;
compliance with a voluntary code of conduct; plastic ties; composition of posters; recycling of
posters; outdoor designated area.
The Deputy Mayor advised Cllr. P. Flannery that as NOM 06/19 had received a reply, the Motion had
been dealt with and would have to be resubmitted to be considered by Members.
At 6.34pm, the Mayor resumed the Chair.
41 page
Cllr. P. Keane queried a point of order, if the issue could be debated, having already dealt with the
Motion within 6 months. The Meeting Administrator, Mr. G. McMahon, advised that the report was
regarding a bye-law, which was subject to legal advice. Legal advice had been received, as per the
Item under discussion, and a new motion submitted. Mr. G. McMahon referred to Standing Order
no. 32:
"Where Councillors wish to revoke or amend a resolution of the Council within 6 months of its
adoption, it shall be necessary for the adoption of a Motion of not less than two thirds (12) of
the membership of the Council voting in favour and subject to any statutory requirements".
Cllr. P. Flannery amended NOM 06/19. A roll call vote was requested by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and
seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery.
NOM 06/19 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 4th March 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
In the interests of environmental protection, of road and pedestrian safety and in supporting Galway
as a tourist oriented city it is proposed that Galway City Council elected body publicly endorse the
proposal that all elected members and all proposed local candidates would sign up to a voluntary
declaration that they will only erect politically motivated election posters in areas specifically
designated by the council under this voluntary protocol.
One outdoor designated area will be provided in each ward along providing a 6 ft by 6 ft space for
erection of promotional material along with equal space at Galway City Hall for the purposes of
erecting promotional election material.
This voluntary declaration document will be provided by Galway City Council can be signed by all
candidates if they so wish at nomination stage.
The document including this protocol will be on public display and will be posted on the Galway City
Council website until after the election the 25th May 2019.
In Favour: Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. P. Flannery; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. J. Walsh
Against: Cllr. B. Cameron; Cllr. P. Conneely; Cllr. M. J. Crowe; Cllr. O. Crowe; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. M.
Farrell; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. M. Lohan; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis; Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty.
Absent: Cllr. C. O'Conchüir
In Favour: 5
Against: 12
Abstain:
o
Present: 17
The Motion was defeated.
Item 2(c) Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (LSSIF)
Mr. B. McGrath reported on the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (LSSIF), which will make a
fund of at least €100million available over the period 2019-2027. Members had received four
presentations for consideration over the last number of weeks, with two seeking funding through
the Technical assistance stream, and two seeking Capital Funding assistance. Mr. B. McGrath advised
that at face value, all projects satisfied the requirements of the LSSIF scheme. Mr. B. McGrath
requested Members to consider their endorsement of the projects and advise the Executive of their
51 Page
preferences in terms of support for the projects. A decision was required as soon as possible, as a
considerable amount of work is required to put forward the projects. The deadline for applications is
the 17th of April 2019, which prohibits a decision being left until the April meeting.
A number of Motions were submitted and were discussed. A discussion on the merits of the
proposed applications and the recommendation process ensued.
Mr. B. McGrath advised members that any project recommended would be subject to an appraisal
and a cost benefit analysis by the Department, which would determine if that project was ultimately
successful.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed that Galway City Council endorse all four projects, and ask the Chief
Executive to revert on the 8th of April to review. This was seconded by Cllr. P. Kane. Cllr. F. Fahy
proposed to accept all four projects and endorse them. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Cllr. O. Crowe advised Members that Connacht Rugby are meeting with their National Governing
Body at the end of March, and would welcome the decision of Galway City Council in advance of the
meeting.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed that a meeting with a one item agenda be held from 5.00pm to 6.00pm on
the 25th of March in order to make a decision on the LSSIF. This was seconded by Cllr. P, Keane.
Cllr. M. J. Crowe proposed an amendment to the motion, in order to deal with Item 2(c) tonight. This
was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly. A vote was taken on the amended motion.
Proposed: Cllr. M. J. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
To deal with Item 2(c) tonight.
In Favour: 7 Against: 10 Abstain: O
The amendment fell.
A vote was taken on the original motion.
Present: 17
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
I propose that a meeting with a one item agenda be held from 5.00pm to 6.00pm on the 25th of
March in order to make a decision on the ISSIF.
In Favour: 14 Against: 3 Abstain:O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. P. Conneely requested that information on the scheme be provided in written form. This was
seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
It was agreed to defer all other motions tabled in relation to Item 2(c) on the agenda for the Special
Meeting on the 25th of March 2019.
61 Page
Seconded by: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane
That Galway City Council endorses equally the Projects at the Connacht Rugby Redevelopment at
the sportsground and the proposed additional development at Cappagh Park and Galway City
Council calls on the Dept of Transport Tourism and Sport to recognise the immense contribution
which both projects would make to the Region.
Not considered, deferred to Special Meeting on 25th March 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Proposed by: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
In the context of Stream 1 Funding under the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund that Galway
City Council endorses on an equal basis the proposed projects at Merlin Woods Sports and
Recreation Campus and the Dyke Road Rowing Centre project and GCC calls on the Department of
Tourism, Transport and Sport to look favourably on the applications by virtue of the immense
social dividend that each project will deliver to Galway City and the region.
Not considered, deferred to Special Meeting on 25th March 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. J. Walsh
Proposed by: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
I propose that Merlin Woods Sports and Recreation Campus be this Council's prioritised project
under Stream 1 of the application for LISSIF development and the rowing project be the second
choice.
Not considered, deferred to Special Meeting on 25th March 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. J. Walsh
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Can I propose Connacht Rugby prioritise number one position in LSSIF.
Not considered, deferred to Special Meeting on 25th March 2019
Item 4 (c) Arts Grants 2019
Proposed: Cllr. M. J. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposal to adopt Item 4 (c) Arts Grants 2019.
It was proposed and agreed by the Council that the proposed Art Grants as circulated be agreed,
and allocation of funding be made as recommended in the document dated 6th March 2019 to
the Arts Organisations outlined, in the sums outlined (as set out in Appendix 1, herein attached).
Cllr. M. Cubbard requested that Item 4 (a) Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021 be dealt
with first at the April Council Meeting. The Mayor agreed.
71 Page
Item 4 (d) Marketing Promotion Fund 2019
Item 4 (d) Marketing Promotion Fund 2019 was proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe and seconded by Cllr. D.
Lyons.
Cllr. M. J. Crowe requested an additional €5,000 be allocated to Galway International Arts Fund. This
was seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely. Cllr. P. Flannery proposed that an additional €5,000 be allocated
to Salthill by the Sea.
The Mayor advised members that there was insufficient time to debate this item, so it would be
deferred until April 2019.
Item 4 (d) Marketing Promotion Fund 2019 — Not Considered.
3.
a)
b)
4.
b)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
k)
5.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Minutes from the Meeting of the Procedures Committee, of 18th February 2019. Not
considered.
Report from the Corporate Policy Group Meeting, of 11th March 2019 regarding
Marketing Promotion Fund 2019. Not considered.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Housing Capital Delivery Programme 2019-2021. Not considered.
Proposed Variation to City Development Plan — Site at Renmore. Not considered.
Christmas Park and Ride. Not considered.
Review of the Christmas Market 2018. Not considered.
Shop Street Refurbishment. Not considered.
Såilin to Silverstrand Project Update. Not considered.
Chief Executive's Reports:
i)
Chief Executive's Report February 2019. Taken as Noted as per Standing
Order 14.
ii) Chief Executive's Report March 2019. Not considered.
Galway European Capital of Culture 2020. Not considered.
NOTICES OF MOTIONS
The Mayor took a Notice of Motion submitted under Standing Order 34 — Motion for the Purpose of
Dealing with Urgent Business.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllrs. N. McNelis; P. Flannery; N. Larkin;
D. McDonnell; T. O'Flaherty; P. Conneely; F. Fahy; J. Walsh; B.
Cameron; M. Cubbard; P. Keane; O. Crowe; M. Lohan; M. Crowe;
C. Connolly; C. Ö Conchüir; M. Farrell
Standing Order 34 Motion for Purpose of Dealing with Urgent Business
In view of the damage that spiralling insurance costs are causing to community groups, voluntary
organisation, charities and small business, Galway City Council calls on the Government to
accelerate its insurance reform programme and in particular, calls on the Government to urgently
recalibrate the Book of Quantum to reflect international norms, immediately establish a distinct
81 Page
Insurance Fraud Unit within an Garda Siochåna and quantify the benefits to policyholders of the
reforms currently being implemented.
The Motion was passed unanimously.
At 7.53pm, the Meetings Administrator, Mr. G. McMahon advised that only Members who are seated
can vote.
A motion was submitted by Cllr. M. Farrell. Mr. B. McGrath clarified the meaning of the Motion, which
was then amended. A vote was taken.
Seconded by: Cllrs. M. Lohan; C. Connolly; M. Cubbard;
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Farrell
N. Larkin; B. Cameron; P. Keane; M.J. Crowe; O. Crowe; P.
Flannery; J. Walsh; P. Conneely; F. Fahy; D. McDonnell; T.
O'Flaherty.
That City Councillors are informed of visits by ambassadors to City Hall to meet the Mayor where
possible.
The Mayor notified Members that the Brazilian Ambassador would be visiting on Wednesday 13th
March 2019. Mr. B. McGrath advised that Ambassadors sometimes visit at short notice, and that
notice may not be practical. Mr. B. McGrath reiterated advice not to make policy on motions from
the floor without prior review and advice on the motion. Mr. B. McGrath advised Members to defer
the Motion to the Procedures Committee.
A vote was taken on the amended motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Conneely Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To refer the Motion to the Procedures Committee.
In Favour: 13 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 15
The amended Motion was passed and became the Substantive Motion.
A motion was submitted by Cllr. B. Cameron for consideration. Mr. B. McGrath notified Members
that a similar Motion had been received from Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. A response had issued to this NOM
05/19, advising that the recommendation should be referred to the Procedures Committee and the
Corporate Policy Group for review. The Mayor advised that the Motion would remain on the agenda.
Seconded by: Cllrs P. Keane; M. Crowe; O. Crowe;
Proposed by: Cllr. B. Cameron
N. Larking; M. Lohan; M. Farrell; T. O'Flaherty; D. McDonnell;
D. Lyons; N. McNelis; F. Fahy.
Michéal Ö hUiginn was Mayor of Galway on 2 separate occasions 72-73, 79-80 and 1995-1996 and
served as a Councillor 1964-2004. In light of being the longest serving Councillor in modern history
I propose that Westside Sports Complex be named The Michéal Ö hUiginn Park.
Not considered.
91
Page
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded: Cllrs. N. McNelis; O. Crowe; M. Lohan; D. Lyons;
P. Flannery; J. Walsh; N. Larkin; P. Keane; D. McDonnell &
Cllr. P. Conneely.
Following last weeks decision by An Bord Pleanala this Council calls on the HSE to immediately
source an alternative site on the grounds of Merlin Park for Galway Hospice.
Motion deferred from Ordinary Meeting on 11th February 2019. Not considered.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllrs. M. Farrell, C. Ö Conchüir, C. Connolly, N. McNelis,
O. Crowe, B. Cameron, N. Larkin, J. Walsh, P. Conneely,
D. McDonnell, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy.
The public amenity parks of Galway City are a unique and valuable resource for all citizens. A Design
Master Plan for their future use, maintenance and infrastructure repair of will commence by the end
of Quarter one 2019, with a preliminary report issued by the end of Quarter 2, 2019. All stakeholders
will have input toward the Design Master Plan.
The reassembly of the Steering Group for Terryland Forrest Park will be part of the process.
Motion deferred from Ordinary Meeting on 11th February 2019. Not considered.
NOM 2/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister
Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have access
to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional in the
sector. Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children
during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care
and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to
make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put
children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not considered.
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
NOM 4/17
Date Received: 2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as
regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC
level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme.
With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost
importance that proper incentives are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and
that the legislation in place is as inclusive as possible"
Not considered.
10 | Page
NOM 9/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing
so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the
European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and
2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region
approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches
broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in
order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order
to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been
built by their efforts along with significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus
licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli Burca,
Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin
located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, GalwaV'.
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new criminal
offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators".
Not considered.
NOM 9/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct
hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge
it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget
Not considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the
Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong
practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
19th November 2018
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Ballinfoile Park to ascertain
the number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and bring forward plans
/ options to eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates"
Not considered.
NOM 01/19 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
28th January 2019
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council consider providing funding in the 2020 budget to finance the provision of
dedicated park wardens in Galway City to ensure that our parks and in particular Terryland Forest
Park, Merlin Woods, Barna Woods, and Crestwood Park are monitored for anti social behaviour,
illegal dumping and tree felling."
Not considered.
NOM 02/19 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 30th January 2019
"That this Council reviews the issuing of parking permits in the Claddagh area. This review should
include the cost of the permit and the amount of permits issued to each residence. It should also
include the type of permit issued to carers and people who are visiting the sick."
Not considered.
NOM 04/19
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 21st February 2019
As proposer of the motion to rezone a seven acre site on lands at Merlin Park Hospital to allow for a
Hospice, as part of the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023, I believe it's now of the upmost
importance that Galway City Council supports the Galway Hospice in seeking a judicial review of the
decision made by An Bord Pleanala to refuse planning permission for the move, and I propose that
the Council does everything in its power to support the Hospice's appeal.
Not considered.
121 Page
NOM 05/19 Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 4th March 2019
"To Mark the 40th anniversary of the founding of the Renmore Pantomime, celebrations will take
place this year and due to this a number of Renmore residents have made representations to me to
give some local recognition to Renmore resident Mr. Joe Mc Carthy, for his great contribution to
the children, the youth and the not so young in the area. The following suggestion to give
acknowledgement and due recognition to Joe's lifetime for his positive contribution to the
community and his involvement in the church including the many individuals for over fifty years is
to name the new proposed playground in his honour and call it "The Joe Mc Carthy Recreation
area"
Response issued 8th March 2019.
NOM 06/19 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 4th March 2019
In the interests of environmental protection, of road and pedestrian safety and in supporting Galway
as a tourist oriented city it is proposed that Galway City Council elected body publicly endorse the
proposal that all elected members and all proposed local candidates would sign up to a voluntary
declaration that they will desist from displaying any type of politically motivated election poster in
areas other than those areas specifically designated by the council under this voluntary protocol.
One outdoor designated area will be provided in each ward along providing a 6 ft by 6 ft space for
erection of promotional material along with equal space at Galway City Hall for the purposes of
erecting promotional election material.
This voluntary declaration document will be provided by Galway City Council can be signed by all
candidates if they so wish at nomination stage.
The document including this protocol will be on public display and will be posted on the Galway City
Council website until after the election the 25th May 2019.
Response issued 8th March 2019.
NOM 07/19 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 4th March 2019
That Galway City Council provide temporary toilet/changing facilities at the all weather pitches in
Westside/Corrib Park as the current situation where male and females are changing on the side of
the road and there are no toilet facilities is unacceptable.
Those units are available to rent or purchase at a reasonable cost and in view of the proposal to
erect modular homes beside the pitches it is imperative that those facilities are put in place for
public health reasons. The units could be similar to that proposed for Doughuisce Park.
Response issued 8th March 2019.
131 Page
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18 Notice given by: Cllr. N.McNelis
Date Received: 2nd January 2018
"Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the
Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and
what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not considered.
Q 4/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
November 2018
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd
at the entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this effect
but no update has been given since.
Not considered.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our
area LIS meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not considered.
Q 1/19 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received:
6th February 2019
It was agreed for the 2018 budget that funding be set aside for the provision of three 'wall ball' hurling
facilities, one in each ward in celebration of Galways victory of the 2017 All Ireland minor and senior
hurling finals. Could we gat an update on the progress of these projects, get confirmation of the sites
chosen and get definitive commencement and finishing dates of these projects for the February 11th
meeting of the council.
Not considered.
Q 2/19 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received:
21st February 2019
Can the Chief Executive provide a copy of the Instrument D2013LR029137R relating to Folio GYI 1570F
of the Register County of Galway. This relates to the public amenity green space in Shantalla behind
the community centre and the ownership rights associated to this valuable greenspace which has
been in continuous use by the residents of Shantalla as a public amenity and which is designated as
such in the City Development Plan.
Response issued 8th March 2019.
14 | Pa ge
7.
1)
2)
8.
(a)
(b)
9.
CORRESPONDENCE
Memorial card received from the Ryan Family in appreciation of letter of sympathy received
from Galway City Council in respect of the late Mrs. Breda Ryan. Not considered.
Proposals to Modernise the Electoral Registration Process. Not considered.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Circular Letter F.09/19 - Reporting of political donations by third parties. Deadline 315t March
2019. Also included Circular F.IO/13 and the draft Guidelines for Third Parties Concerning
Donations for Political Purposes. Not considered.
Western Development Commission Sectoral Profile — Industry Employment. 3 Reports. Not
considered.
ESRI Report — Valuing Community Development Through the Social Inclusion Programme
(SICAP) 2015-2017: Towards a Framework for Evaluation. Not considered.
Irish Congress of Trade Unions — The Implications of a No-Deal Brexit. Not considered.
Regional STEAM Youth FAIR — save the date — 25th April 2019. Not considered.
CONFERENCES
Item 9 - Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. F Fahy.
1)
1)
2)
Title: Ireland & Plastic Waste
Date: 12th 13th & 14th April 2019
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Noel Larkin, Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr.
Declan McDonnell & Cllr. John Walsh.
Approved Training:
Title: Irish Planning Institute, Annual Planning Conference 2019
Date: 4th & 5th April 2019
Venue: The Landmark Hotel, Carrick-on-Shannon, Leitrim
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Billy Cameron & Cllr. Niall McNelis.
Institute of Professional Training — Training Seminar for Local Authority Members —
Title:
Changing Trends and Approaches to Drug and Alcohol Abuse
Date: 12th, 13th & 14th April 2019
Venue: CaseVs Hotel, Baltimore, West Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Billy Cameron, Cllr. Noel Larkin & Cllr. Niall McNelis.
15 | Page
IO. Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations
Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. M. Farrell and seconded by Cllr. M.
Lohan.
•
•
•
Votes of Sympathy
Conor Burke R.I.P.
Maureen Burke (nee O'Connor) R.I.P.
Helen Smyth R.I.P.
Gerti Flaherty R.I.P.
Marian Hegarty R.I.P.
Peggy Tully R.I.P.
Mary Ruane R.I.P.
Votes of Congratulations
• Gabriel Dossen
11.
N/A
12.
N/A
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 8.00pm.
16 | Page
Appendix 1 —
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
APPLICANT
Adventures in
Music
Anam Theatre
Architecture
at the Edge
Artspace
Studios
Babor6
Blue Teapot
Theatre
Company
Branar Téatar
do Ph6isti
2018
3,000
2,000
9,000
17,000
5,000
5,000
REQUEST
2,000
5,161.
20
5,000
11,000
38,000
6,000
20,000
2019
2,000
500
3,000
9,000
18,000
5,000
6,000
Arts Grants 2019
NOTES
A volunteer organisation established with the
ambition to provide child and family-focused
musical experiences; to support music education
programmes in Galway primary schools.
A theatre company that brings Northern European-
inspired work to Galway audiences. Funding is
towards the work on realising Finding Galahad an
original work by Sarah O'Toole.
A voluntary organisation dedicated to the
promotion of architecture as culture. A curated
weekend celebration of architecture in 2019 which
will again feature a series of talks, films, workshops
and exhibitions that highlight the value and
potential of our built environment.
Providing affordable quality studio spaces for
professional artists. 22 studios for 27 artists.
To inspire children to engage with the world
through their experience of the arts. To provide
access to and participation in the arts for children,
by breaking down barriers both real and perceived,
whether financial, social, educational,
geographical, intellectual or physical.
A multi-award winning theatre company,
performing arts school and outreach programme
for people with intellectual disabilities at the
forefront of arts and disability in Ireland.
Committed to high quality theatre, training and the
celebration of creativity with a mission to effect
positive change in public consciousness, allowing
members inherent talent and creativity to speak
for itself.
One of the leading theatre companies making work
for children in Ireland, creating beautiful,
innovative, high-quality productions that inspire
children and their families, touring work,
supporting artists to make work for young
audiences through tailored programmes of
resource sharing and Tiny Show creation, creating
opportunities for children to explore their own arts
practice in school settings.
17 |
Page
8
9
IO
11
12
13
14
Brü Theatre,
Claddagh
Clay Galway
Croi na
Gaillimhe
Writers
Cüirt
International
Festival of
Literature
(Galway Arts
Centre)
Decadent
Theatre
Company
Druid Theatre
Company
Eastside
Community
Drama
2,500
13,000
No
recom
mendat
ion
29,000
2,250
7,000
3,200
1,000
27,000
5,000
35,000
3,600
2,500
1,000
500
13,000
3,000
29,000
2,250
Making interesting and evocative theatre in
Galway that is engaging, exciting and of the highest
standard, drawing on James Riordan's years of
experience in Berlin and London to bring European
style theatre to Galway.
Established in the summer of 2018 by a group of
ceramic artists with the ambition of developing a
vibrant culture of ceramics in Galway, inter alia
encouraging local communities to explore the
artistic possibilities of clay through workshops,
collaborative practice, exhibitions and sculptural
installations.
To promote creative writing through a SVP
organised group in Croi na Gaillimhe.
Cüirt seeks to provide a world class programme of
literary and arts events that cater to local, national
and international attendees. The festival aims to
showcase and champion Irish writers alongside
authors from across the globe. Dedicated to
fostering the next audiences for literature Cuirt
provides a challenging and dynamic programme for
young readers and writers, engages with
communities in the wider Galway area in diverse
locations.
Established in Galway in 2004 by Andrew Flynn, the
company aims to create theatre of the highest
quality with an emphasis on classic works from the
Irish dramatic tradition as well as presenting new
and contemporary work. Next to Druid Decadent is
the largest professional theatre company in the
west of Ireland.
One of the finest and greatest theatre companies
in the world, producing and presenting the best
work, both old and new with boldness, agility,
passion and flair. Including the FUEL Artist
Residency programme for artists making theatre in
the west of Ireland, to foster emerging and local
artist projects to full production.
An inclusive organisation that works in community
drama for the last 14 years, providing people with
the opportunity to develop their theatre acting,
181 Page
15
16
17
18
19
20
Engage Art
Studios
The Forge Clay
Studios
Fregoli
Theatre
Company
Galway
African
Diaspora
Galway Art
Club
Galway Arts
Centre
7,500
1,000
2,000
1,000
20,000
20,000
10.000
4,000
5,800
1,000
47 ,OOO
12,000
1,000
2,000
2,000
1,000
40,000
technical and facilitation skills, operating with a
tutor on a contract basis.
To provide affordable high quality professional
studio space to professional artists in Galway and
to create a visual arts support structure, with in
2019 a major increase in activities through the
relocation to Churchfields, Salthill, to become a
substantial visual arts centre, including a gallery /
project space.
A collective of artists in Galway city centre,
providing studio space -= including ceramic studio
space - and acting as a community resource in the
'West'.
Founded in 2007, a theatre company that produces
and performs original energetic, stimulating and
contemporary work that appeals to a large cross-
section of the Irish public, with plays that deal with
issues of a changing society and attitudes.
Developing work by new writers.
An arts focused community group based in the city
with the aim of promoting African and Afro
descendant cultures —an open and inclusive group
that aims to develop an Afro cultural artistic
foundation in Galway city.
Founded in 1937 as a support organisation for
Galway artists, providing an annual summer
exhibition, and talks, lectures, workshops and visits
for members. Funding is mainly towards the
annual summer show in St Patrick's NS as well as
their programme of lectures, classes and
workshops.
A multidisciplinary hub with a mission to provide
year-round access to high-quality collaborative,
community-based contemporary arts experiences
and opportunities for increased engagement for
adults and children in Galway. The €20K increase in
funding is for the creation of an essential strategic
plan for the Galway Arts Centre. Galway Arts
Centre is based in Council-owned properties in
Nuns Island and 47 Dominick St, Lower.
191 Page
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Galway
Baroque
Singers
Galway
Baytones
Galway
Cartoon
Festival
Galway
Cathedral
Recitals
Galway Choral
Association
Galway
Community
Circus
Galway Dance
Project
4,500
1,000
2,100
2,000
8,500
5,500
4,500
1,500
8,000
2,100
5,000
20,000
7,000
4,500
500
1,000
2,100
2,000
8,500
5,500
Performing and fostering a high standard of choral
singing, encouraging a love of choral singing in the
community, especially among young people.
Performing, promoting, and recording major choral
works accompanied by professional
orchestra/musicians. Also smaller choral concerts,
lunchtime concerts. Alone among Galway choirs
The Baroques regularly work with the RTE Concert
Orchestra and must bear the costs of bringing the
orchestra to Galway.
Amateur group formed in 2008, originally to sing
barbershop choruses, which has developed into a
male voice singing group within the Galway city
area. The common interest is the promotion of A
Capella singing.
The promotion of 'The Ninth Art' through a festival
celebrating comics, caricature and cartoons with
significant international partnerships in exhibitions,
performances, workshops and events.
Galway Cathedral Recitals presents an annual
international concert series in Galway Cathedral,
on Thursday evenings in July and early August. The
concerts are based primarily around the
Cathedral's magnificent pipe organ.
Galway Choral Association was founded in 1998 as
an umbrella organisation to provide choral singing
for both adults and children in Galway. The
association continues to provide an opportunity for
amateur singers to come together, striving to bring
the music of the great masters to the community.
Ireland's flagship organisation for youth and social
circus at the heart of Galway city with a local,
national and international remit. The aim is to
advance the artistic, personal and social
development of young people through circus arts.
A non-profit dance organisation established in
2011 by six independent Galway dance artists,
aiming to provide high-quality, professional
standard, dance training, education, choreographic
and performance opportunities for dancers in
Galway. Supporting, advancing and promoting
dance
201 Page
28
29
30
31
Galway Early
Music
Galway
Feminist
Collective
Galway Film
Fleadh
Galway Film
Society
9,000
700
18,000
5,000
10,000
1,200
30,000
8,000
9,000
700
18,000
5,000
The promotion of an annual festival of early
European and Irish music (12 — 17 C), singing and
dance in the context of Galway's medieval heritage
through performances, workshops, education and
research, thus increasing awareness and interest in
such music and dance amongst the youth and the
communities of Galway. The creation of a new area
of cultural tourism for Galway and the exploration
of our Irish early music heritage as part of our
European art heritage. 2019 sees the 25th Galway
Early Music Festival.
Established in 2015 by a group of feminist artists
and activists living in Galway, including musicians,
writers, filmmakers and actors. As a collective the
aim is to be as inclusive as possible, representing
the diverse experiences of women living in Galway.
The Galway Film Fleadh is an international film
event comprised of a film festival, conference and
film market, all taking place over six days in July. Its
mission statement is two-fold: to be a global
launching pad for new Irish film and filmmaking
talent and to bring a highly curated festival of
international, independent and art cinema to
Galway.
Ireland's largest and longest established film
society provides access for Galway audiences to
the widest possible range of international and non-
commercial art film projected at the highest
possible level of technical excellence. The Film
Society has been operating in Galway since 1964,
bringing a wide and varied programme of non-
commercial films and specialising in audience
development, education and outreach community
projects with a wide range of community and
cultural organisations.
21 |
32
33
34
35
36
Galway
Internation
al Arts
Festival
Galway Jazz
Festival
Galway
Music
Residency
Galway
Musical
Society
Galway
Percy
French
Society
46,00
9,000
24,00
3,000
500
70,000
12,000
26,000
5,000
650
o
10,00
o
24,00
o
3,000
500
A major cultural organisation which produces one of
Europe's leading international arts festivals, developing
and producing new work that tours nationally and
internationally and presents a major discussion
platform, the First Thoughts talks. In 2018 there were
over 200 performances talks and exhibitions in over 30
venues, with over 250,000 attendees. In 2019 the
Festival will offer 25% of its programme free to the
public.
A festival dedicated to presenting the highest quality
international and Irish jazz to as wide an audience as
possible in a way that's engaging and respectful to
artist and audience and is deeply committed to
exploring the connections between other art forms and
jazz.
Established in 2002 to cultivate a comprehensive music
development programme for Galway with a
professional ensemble at its centre. The programme
was designed to bring performances to new audiences
in Galway and to broaden the experience of those
already involved in music. GMR now runs a vibrant
programme of community and educational projects
engaging young musicians and listeners of all ages.
Founded in 1985 the society has performed thirty three
musicals and has been awarded eighty six national
awards by the Association of Irish Musical Societies.
A vibrant and innovative Galway arts organisation that
aims always to promote various genres of music and
music appreciation, literature, local and oral history
through the ages, art in all its various forms in the best
tradition of Percy French.
22 | P a ge
37
38
39
40
41
42
The Galway
Review
Galway
Steinway
(1981) Trust
Galway
Theatre
Festival
Galway
University
Hospitals
Arts Trust
Galway
Youth
Orchestra
Galway
Youth
Theatre
300
600
8,000
10,00
2,000
1,000
600
12,000
18,000
5,000
6,000
300
600
9,000
10,00
o
4,000
2,000
The annual publication of a creative and discursive
literature magazine and its associated website.
The maintenance, servicing and administration of the
Steinway Piano kept at N.U.I., Galway by the Trust and
used for public performances by Music for Galway and
professionals suitably qualified in the Trust's
judgement The piano, which is valued at €100,000, is
"held in trust for the people of Galway
To continue to promote, facilitate and present the work
of young, emerging companies and artists with an
emphasis on local theatre makers from Galway and the
West,; to provide audiences in the West with access to
high-quality work by local, national and international
theatre companies; to make high-quality theatre
experiences accessible to local communities and to
broaden theatre participation; to assist professional
development and to provide a dedicated theatre
festival that is known for its standard of excellence and
innovation,
Working with the hospital community Galway
University Hospitals Arts Trust provides a high quality,
multi-disciplinary arts programme to improve the
hospital experience and promote wellbeing. Through
diverse means of creative engagement it enhances the
environment and supports the discovery and
development of creative potential — encouraging new
ways of seeing and fresh dialogue — making the hospital
a place of possibilities.
The longest established youth community orchestra in
the west of Ireland and also one of the longest
continuously running youth orchestras in the Republic
of Ireland. Ensemble playing for young people aged 8 —
24 yrs. — weekly 2 hr. rehearsals for 27 weeks, at least
two public concerts per year, working in music
development in Galway. Promoting love and
appreciation of music through training and
performance opportunities
Providing young people with the experiences of
devising, scripting and performing theatrical works;
introducing them to technical areas of theatre through
production courses; creating social and educational
environments for training and imagination.
23 p a g e
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
The Good
Folk
Hot Potato
Productions
Impressions
Print
Biennial
Irish
Patchwork
Society
(Western
Branch)
John Rogers
Theatre
Junior
Galway Film
Fleadh
(Galway
Film Fleadh)
KATS
Little
Cinema
Galway
900
2,000
500
700
1,500
1,000
5,000
4,000
3.390
4,000
open
3,800
7.500
3,000
9,000
1,000
900
2,000
500
700
1,500
1,000
5,000
A newly established collective of five core artist
members working with established arts companies
across the city who are eager to begin creating their
own work and develop an artistic practice in a number
of different disciplines. The funding is recommended
towards the production of the collective's debut film —
Püca..
A theatre company engaging in socially engaged
practice across topics of current concern, including
Direct Provision.
Established in 1988, Impressions is Ireland's first and
longest running open submission fine art printmaking
exhibition.
Promotion of the practice and art of patchwork
applique and quilting, through lectures, networking,
workshops, publications and exhibitions. Founded 38
years ago.
A company in constant reinvention of theatre that is
nonetheless grounded in tradition and is building a new
drama audiences in Galway. Work that is infused by an
on-going playfulness of ideas that allows for a deep
exploration of words, ideas, emotions and themes that
are often challenging and loaded.
The Junior Galway Film Fleadh — the education and
outreach arm of the Galway Film Fleadh — is a specially
curated festival of screenings, events and workshops
for young adults. The festival celebrates the magic and
power of cinema in educating, entertaining and
informing young people.
Knocknacarra Amateur Theatre Society was founded by
the late Paddy Henry in 1998 and since then has
evolved into a dynamic community force for theatre in
Knocknacarra and Galway in general. Now in its 21st
year KATS aspires to continue to bring quality theatre
to the city of Galway.
A monthly screening of short films, providing a
platform and meeting place for filmmakers to present
their work to a live audience and collaborate with other
filmmakers. As well as screening each month Little
Cinema collaborates with Galway Theatre Festival,
Galway Film Fleadh and the Galway Film Centre for
special screenings.
24 | Page
52
53
54
55
56
67
58
A Little
Door
Luminosa
Macnas
Moonfish
Theatre
Company
Morgan
Brothers
Music for
Galway
New Moon
(Brothers of
Charity)
1,000
24,00
o
5,300
600
16,00
1,500
2,000
6,711.4
7
100,00
o
10,000
1,690
20,051
2,500
1,000
3,250
24,00
o
5,300
600
16,00
o
1,500
Established by artist Manuela Corbari to provide a
space for partnership between artists of different
disciplines to create and present high quality and
innovative work. The primary focus is on work for
young audiences, with access for all a priority.
The artistic purpose of Luminosa is to give Galway City
its first professional orchestra. 'We want to shine a
light on the outstanding musicians who join the
Luminosa String Orchestra for distinction in
performance, organisation, innovation and community
engagement'. A collection of Galway-based
professional musicians with world-class credentials in
performance.
Macnas creates extraordinary interactive spectacle for
audiences, festivals and communities in Galway and
around the world. Macnas is a vital pillar in Galway for
the city's people, business communities and culture.
Macnas' s work enables Galway citizens to participate
and engage in cultural activity offering accessible public
engagement. Over 370 citizens take part annually in
Macnas signature events to audiences of over 55,000
people.
A collaborative ensemble that blends our rich culture of
language, story-telling, music and dance with theatrical
languages such as puppetry, interactive technology and
movement to create exhilarating experiences that
challenge and excite audiences.
Towards the development of a new film scripted by
Christian O'Reilly, as part of a creative programme of
film, music, theatre and literature.
Since its establishment in 1981 Music for Galway has
programmed and delivered high-quality musical
experiences for the people of the west coast of Ireland
, incorporating a range of artists from Ireland and
beyond. Initially conceived to provide access to
international and national classical musical experiences
for local audiences which were largely unavailable at
the time it has become a valued music resource
organisation for Galway and the west.
A unique multi-sensory and participatory theatre
project for people with intellectual disabilities, complex
needs and Autism.
251 Page
59
60
61
62
63
NoRopes
Theatre
Company
126 Artist-
run Gallery
Over the
Edge
Red Bird
(Galway
Arts Centre)
Renmore
Pantomime
1,000
8,000
3,000
2,000
15,800
4,500
5,000
4,000
1,500
8,000
3,000
1,000
1,000
The aim is to make good theatre, to challenge accepted
understandings in society and the boundaries they can
impose through the production of originasl, innovative
and little known dramatic works. Each project
foregrounds experiences of disempowerment or
struggle and the desire for creative solutions, improved
understanding and capacity-building through shared
experience.
Established in 2005, 126 is an artist-led organisation
integral to the visual arts culture in Galway. Run
voluntarily by a board of professional artists 126
curates and programmes an arts space including a
contemporary exhibition programme, talks and
workshops, residencies and research projects. Its focus
is to support emerging contemporary practices and
partnerships by creating exhibition, commission and
development opportunities.
To provide a platform for emerging writers; to bring the
leading writers in Ireland and internationally to read in
Galway on a regular basis, helping emerging writers to
gain skills and confidence and find an audience,
through readings and events, publishing and a
manuscript service. Seeking to create a safe, consistent
and structured space in which amateur writers,
professional writers and lovers of literature can meet,
share work, inspire each other and network with each
other. Working closely with Galway Arts Centre, GMIT,
GTI, Cüirt and Galway businesses.
Red Bird Youth arts Collective facilitates process-based
art making in collaboration with professional artists,
supports youth-led programming and contributes to
Galway Arts Centre's youth arts policy. Comprised of
YAs aged 15-23, with talents in writing, visual arts and
event production they have completed 5 YES projects,
EWA projects and received Arts Council national tour
funding since 2011. They have created a website and
programmed events, workshops and gigs for their
peers. They also work regularly in collaboration with
Adolescent Mental Health Services on projects funded
by NCYI<
To foster, encourage and assist theatrical, cultural and
artistic activities, primarily in the Renmore community
but also throughout Galway City and its environs. The
aims and objectives are to present an annual Christmas
26 | Page
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
St Nicholas
Schola
Cantorum
Skylight
47Poets
Speckled
Egg Dance
Company
Taibhdhearc
na
Gaillimhe
That's Life
(Brothers of
Charity)
The Theatre
Room
Tulca
Festival of
Visual Art
3,200
300
4,000
2,000
10,00
4,250
1,850
1,032
25,000
5,000
2,500
20,000
3,200
750
300
2,000
4,000
2,000
10,00
o
Pantomime with the involvement of approximately.
200 people.
A dynamic new version of the ancient college of singing
priests and boy choristers established in the Collegiate
Church of St Nicholas in 1486, under the direction of
Mark Duley the Schola Cantorum provides valuable
instruction and rewarding experience to singers of all
ages and backgrounds and opens up the church's
unique cultural heritage for all the people of Galway.
Members of a weekly writer's workshop who produce
two editions of Skylight 47 poetry magazine each year.
Funding is towards the payment of contributors.
Established to facilitate the development of artistic
agency through dance and choreographic practice of
adults with intellectual disabilities in Galway.
Ireland's national Irish language theatre. Funding is for
an agreed professional theatre project.
That's Life music project engages people with
intellectual disability in creative music making and
performances. Formed originally in 2001 the project
has developed over the years into a wide range of
accessible and engaging activities including a variety of
music workshops, an indie pop band, a barrel organ
music project with street performances, DJ and VJ
training and performances, the well-established Club
Tropicana and a gamelan ensemble.
An initiative in emerging accessible theatre, staged in
non-traditional theatre spaces, engaging with ever-
growing ensemble of artists of all ages and skill levels.
Galway's innovative visual arts festival — a multi-venue
high-quality artist-centred festival of contemporary art
works with Irish curators to present innovative
exhibitions that provoke and energise audiences into
the world of the visual arts. A major multi-venue visual
arts festival initiative in Galway city, striving to place
Galway firmly at the forefront of contemporary
international visual culture, celebrating Galway's
unique contribution to the creation of great painting
and sculpture, resourcing the city's substantial
population of artists, art educators and art lovers
271 Page
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
Westside
3,500
Arts Festival
5,250
open
1,300
1,500
3,000
5,000
5,270
4,500 Westside Arts Festival was established to promote,
Westside
Youth
Project
(Youth
Work
Ireland,
Galway)
Westworks
Theatre
Wheelie
Wonders
Wild West
Uke Fest
Write-on
Group
Youth Ballet
West
500
500
2,500
500
500
1,000
500
550
2,500
support and celebraste the Community of Westside
through the arts. Originally the festival was set up as a
youth arts festival by local youth workers and
volunteers. However the festival — now in its 15th year —
has evolved into a much broader community arts
festival for the whole neighbourhood, an important
and unique annual event that brings local people
together in a fun, positive and creative way, the only
such community arts festival in Galway city,
Operating three projects (Westside Youth Project,
shout!) and CAPE). The funding is towards the Youth
Project's work on Traveller identity and culture,
expressed through contemporary art projects.
Created by three city theatre makers collectively to
engage with social issues affecting our community and
the world at large today, a desire to engage with those
issues through creative means and the ambition to
present the public with bold new theatre productions
that spark conversations and ignite imagination.
The Irish Wheelchair Association drama and film
project group that socially integrates with a varied
group of people with all abilities, sparking education in
culture and art form, community spirit and confidence
building. Nominated by Galway City Council for a Pride
and Place Award in 2018.
Wild West Uke Fest emerged from the Galway Ukele
Group as a festival of highly participative music making
events in Galway's 'West'.
An emerging creative writing group that is based in the
Westside Resource Centre and published its excellent
first anthology of creative writing in 2018.
A non-profit organisation offering young dancers in the
West of Ireland the opportunity to perform in
professionally choreographed ballets of the highest
standard, gaining performance experience and training.
€430 ooo
28 | P a g e
& Signed
