Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Friday 11th May, 2018,
at 2.30pm in the Meyrick Hotel, Eyre Square, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: C. 6 Conchöir, P. Conneely, O. Crowe, M.Cubbard, F. Fahy, P.
Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T.
O'Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T.
Connell, Director of Services
Phllbln, A/ Director of Services
Ms. p.
McMahon, A/ Director of Services
Mr. G.
Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. A.
Foley, Administrative Officer
Mr. p.
Ms. C.
Phelan, Senior Planner
Breathnach, Irish Officer
Ms. A.
Mr. J. Harold, Arts Officer
Ms. F. Coen, A/ Staff Officer
Mr. D. Feeney, Clerical Offcer
Councillors B. Cameron, M.J. Crowe, C. Connolly, M. Farrell
The meeting was opened by Mayor P. Flannery, who welcomed the Mayor of Boston, Martin J.
Walsh, to Galway City.
Mayor Flannery outlined how he was delighted to propose the motion to honour Martin J.
Walsh, the Irish-American Democrat Mayor of Boston, with the freedom of Galway City. This is
the highest honour Galway City Council can bestow on anyone. Mayor Flannery indicated that
the honour was richly deserved in recognition of Martin J. Walsh being returned as Mayor of
Boston with a comprehensive majority, and for his commitment to inclusivity and diversity. The
Mayo(s father, the late Mr. John Walsh, was an emigrant from Carna and his mother, Ms,
Mary Walsh, is a native of Rosmuc.
Mayor M. Walsh indicated that he has strong connections with Connemara and he was
delighted that Galway people were so proud of his achievement in becoming first citizen of a
city which has always had strong ties to Connemara and Galway.
Mayor M. Walsh signed the scroll of Honour, and accepted the Freedom of the City of Galway,
with the award being conferred by Mayor Flannery on behalf of Galway City Council.
Mayor M. Walsh was presented with a gift by Mayor Flannery. The meeting closed at 3.30pm.
nfirmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway