Presiding:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 11th September, 2017,at 4.00 p.m.,
in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway
Present: Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
In Attendance:
A olo ies:
B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services,
E. McCormack, Head of Finance/Director of Services,
Ms.
E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms.
Ms. P. Philbin A/Director of Services,
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator,
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Mr
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Executive Engineer,
Ms.
G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Mr.
Ms. N.
Moggan, Management Accountant,
Coen, Senior Staff Officer.
Ms. M.
Cllr p.
. Keane
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with the newly adopted Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Mayor Flannery welcomed all and put forward a motion to congratulate both the Senior and
Minor Galway Hurling Teams on their recent victories and proposed a Civic Reception. This
was seconded by Cllr. John Walsh and agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
"That Galway City Council offer the Galway Minor & Senior Hurling teams the honour of a
Civic reception in recognition of their achievements of winning the Minor and Senior
Hurling Finals in 2017".
This reception will be held at a date that is mutually suitable to both the Galway Hurling
Board and Galway City Council at a venue yet to be decided"
Mayor Flannery advised that the CENA presentation as set out at the start of the Council
Agenda will be taken as part of Item 2(a) To consider a Mid Term Review of the Traveller
Accommodation Programme 2014 — 2018. This was agreed.
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th July 2017
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Matters of Accuracy: A synopsis of matters of accuracy raised by Councillors:
Request for further details regarding lands by Galway City Council at Ballyburke;
Ballinfoile Community Centre opening;
Discussion by a number of Councillors regarding the Corrib Great Southern hotel status
and details regarding preplanning meetings. A proposal was put forward by Cllr. F. Fahy
to use the site for housing provision by means of Compulsory Purchase Order, which
was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard;
Request for numbers of landlords on Housing Assistance Payments Scheme for 2015,
2016 & 2017;
Request for update on the Parking Meters;
Request for a breakdown of the LIS Scheme projects;
Roundabouts maintenance and clarification if it is it duty of the City Council to keep the
centre of roundabouts clear;
Enforcement of the Anti-Social Behaviour Policy and request for update regarding
contact between Tenant Liaison Officers (TLO) and An Garda Siochana;
Anti-social behaviour in Playgrounds and European Directive - clarification as to
whether it is the policy of Galway City Council to leave playgrounds unfenced.
Request for projected programme of works regarding playgrounds, timeline for woks
and balance in budget including playground at Lakeshore, Renmore.
Tourist Office replacement update;
Proposed amalgamation — clarification regarding financial input from Galway County
Council regarding European Capital of Culture;
Update on graffiti removal in conjunction with Probation services;
Salmon Weir Bridge — request for cleaning/painting before next Summer;
Update on the bus corridor right turn on the Tuam Road;
Request for dates of remaining CPG meetings for 2017;
The Chief Executive noted and replied to the items raised by Councillors. Replies were also
given by Ms. P. Philbin A/Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane A/Director of Services, Mr. T.
Connell, Director of Services and Mr. U. Finn Senior Engineer. Following this, clarification
was requested by Councillors on a number of items synopsised below:
Opening hours for Ballinfoile Community Centre, timeline for full opening and reference
to operating systems;
LIS Scheme and request for further meeting before year end;
Number of Parking Meters not working and, if they were upgraded due to Sunday
parking;
Grass cutting at night;
Roundabouts update;
Expert Advisory Group on the Amalgamation — request for brief outline of the process;
2
Request for details of preplanning discussions regarding Corrib Great Southern Hotel
and timeline regarding enforcement under Derelict Sites Act;
Cappagh Park tender update;
Expenditure from Galway County Council in relation to Capital of Culture;
Request for outcome reports regarding contact between TLOs and An Garda Siochana
regarding anti social behaviour / drug dealing;
Replies were issued on matters of clarification by Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive and Mr.
U. Finn Senior Engineer. The Chief Executive proceeded to read a statement to the
Councillors as follows: "l wish to bring to your attention, as Elected Members of Galway City
Council, you are expected to respect the rights of each individual to whom you encounter
when conducting business with Local Authority. When you engage with the Media in respect
of the business of the City Council, and the role and functions of individual departments, I
would ask that you do so in a respectful manner and be aware of your obligations in this
regard. In Statements to the media, an individual staff members name should not be used,
nor, should information such that it identifies individual staff members. Galway City Council
requires that any individual or organisations, with whom it deals with directly or indirectly,
in any capacity, behave towards the Council's employees with integrity and without intent
and should not engage in actions or commentary where such would undermine an
individual employee's authority or to undermine the nature of their work. I respectfully ask
that you be mindful of this". The Chief Executive advised that he had been requested by the
Trade Unions to bring this matter to the attention of Councillors.
A brief discussion followed on this matter and there was general agreement with the
content of the Chief Executive's statement, it was also agreed that Councillors should also
be respected in their role. Replies on clarification were concluded by the Chief Executive.
The Minutes were adopted.
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Meeting would continue to 7.30 p.m., at which time
there would be a break for 15 minutes and then continue until 8.45pm. This was seconded
by Cllr. O. Crowe and agreed.
1 (b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 17th July 2017
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Matters Arising:
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
• Request for clarification as to when Standing Orders come into effect and a
suggestion that the Prayer should have been recited at start of the Meeting.
Replies issued on matters arising by the Chief Executive.
The Minutes were adopted.
3
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (a) To consider a Mid-Term Review of Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 —
2018 pursuant to the Traveller Accommodation Act 1998.
A presentation titled "Culturally Appropriate Traveller Accommodation — Innovative Design
Solutions — report on consultations in Galway City" was delivered by Mr. Jack Keyes and Ms.
Jackie Carroll. Following this Councillors discussed the presentation and raised a number of
questions in relation to the presentation as follows:-
Clarification in relation to how CENA operates, management, upkeep and maintenance,
status of tenants and transfer policy. Presently, if a tenant becomes a member of a
voluntary scheme, then become a voluntary tenant;
Is there provision for tenant to purchase property;
Request for clarification on the definition/meaning of well-designed culturally
appropriate housing;
Query regarding provision for compatible families into the future as families grow and
clarification on when families expand — is that the responsibility of CENA;
Information requested regarding success rate in Tullamore requesting start and finish
timelines;
Query if the presenters have visited Fana Glas in Ballybane;
The need to help younger couples was noted;
Concern raised regarding the number of approved housing bodies;
Concern raised regarding antisocial behaviour; are tenants subject to adherence of
Galway City Council's Anti-Social Behaviour Policy;
Clarification sought on the number of halting sites to be debated and whether a site has
been identified;
Clarification sought on timeframe regarding funding of €1m;
Concerns regarding any accommodation units greater than to 4 — 7 units and trailer
spaces next to housing;
Management of horses, sulky racing; waste management, scrap metal; bonfires &
overcrowding in halting sites;
Issue of Travellers and homelessness raised;
Request for a study visit to other CENA sites;
Clarification sought regarding the Mid Term Review; request to bring back to the
Strategic Policy Committee and then full Council.
A proposal was put forward by Cllr. F. Fahy that CENA operate the City Council halting sites
which was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
Ms. Carroll responded to design related questions advising that the culturally appropriate
housing had subtle differences like including space for a trailer. Mr. Keyes advised that CENA
will be the landlord and will have clear strict management and tenancy procedures similar
to other Voluntary Housing Bodies. Mr. Keyes highlighted that compatibility of families is
very important. Mr. Keyes referred to CENA's role in Galway and Tullamore since 2015. He
noted the need in Galway to identify a site and families. He made reference to pressure
from the Department and, in turn, writing to Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive on this matter. In
4
the overall context, Mr. Keyes stressed the urgency of maintaining a presence in Galway and
re-iterated the need to get started.
Councillors raised the following items for Clarification:-
Definition of Culturally Appropriate Housing;
Proposal that CENA take over Doughiska as a Pilot scheme; clarification regarding status
of the site;
Consideration of the issue of employment;
If funding not used is it lost to the City Council;
Does the CENA proposal satisfy halting site requirements;
Powers of CENA regarding moving illegal occupants on sites and provision of
accommodation for illegal occupants;
Clarification in relation to issues when starting Tullamore project;
Issue raised regarding families that will not transfer City from Westside to Eastside;
If CENA take over running a site, are applicants taken off the City Council's Housing
Waiting List;
Does CENA engage with the L TACC or the SPC regarding nomination of a site;
Clarification sought if Councillors being asked to vote on Item 2(a) To consider Mid-
Term Review at this Meeting;
Mr. J. Keyes advised that CENA will engage and confirmed tenants will be taken from Galway
City Council's Housing Waiting List. Mr. Keyes noted the benefits of an interagency
committee and in relation to the issues of employment advised that they are exploring the
development of an apprenticeship scheme in Offaly. Ms. J. Carroll reiterated her previous
clarification on culturally appropriate housing as provided for in legislation noting that the
differences are subtle.
The Chief Executive thanked both the Galway Traveller Movement and CENA noting that this
presentation was to deliver the results on consultations held. He noted that CENA are
moving forward with a project in Offaly and if they do not progress in Galway that funding
will be lost to Galway City Council. He highlighted that there is a legal obligation to deal with
the Traveller Accommodation Programme (TAP). The Chief Executive referenced his
emergency powers but continued that he believes in a democratic approach.
Ms. P Philbin, A/Director of Services confirmed that in adopting the review, Councillors are
not adopting any sites. She confirmed that a full review will take place again next year. She
noted that the Doughiska site will be a mix of social and traveller accommodation and
confirmed the requirement for consultation with families. Ms. Philbin confirmed that any
proposals will return before Council as Part 8 legislation.
5
A discussion ensued among the Councillors. Cllr. B. Cameron put forward a motion to
consider and adopt Item 2(a) Mid-Term Review of Traveller Accommodation Programme
2014 - 2018 pursuant to the Traveller Accommodation Act 1998, which was seconded by
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir
To consider and adpot a Mid-Term Review of Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014
— 2018 pursuant to the Traveller Accommodation Act 1998.
In Favour: 15
Against: 2
Absent: 1
The Motion was carried.
The Chief Executive advised he will be in further consultation with Councillors regarding Part
8 legislation on a case by case basis. He suggested the reconvening of the Local Traveller
Accommodation Consultative Committee.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded: Cllr. M. Cubbard
"That Galway City Council initiates the reconstitution of the Inter-Agency Traveller Group"
Against: 3
In Favour: 14
The Motion was carried.
Absent: 1
2 (b) Capital Assistance Scheme — Raising of a loan under Section 6 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 1992 for the acquisition of housing unit at 18 Bin Sin,
Knocknacarra, Galway.
Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
"Raising of a loan under Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 1992 for
the acquisition of housing unit at 18 Bin Sin, Knocknacarra, Galway."
Against: O
In Favour: 16
The Motion was carried.
Absent: 2
2 (c) Section 183 Notice — Proposal for disposal of Lands at Dun na Mara, Renmore.
The Chief Executive referred Councillors to the report circulated and advised that
Councillors could accept, reject or propose an amendment(s) to the proposal.
There was a lengthy discussion on this item with Councillors noting the opportunity for the
development of nine houses at a time when there is a housing crisis in the City. Issues were
raised such as the possibility of ring fencing the €60,000 for provision of traffic alleviation
works in the area. Councillors raised concerns of the residents and the issues of parking/
access to the estate. The Chief Executive confirmed that it was not possible to ring fence
these monies as it is a capital receipt.
6
Mayor Flannery noted that the time was now 7.30pm. Cllr. T. O' Flaherty, Cllr. F. Fahy and
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that Standing Orders be suspended so that a roll call vote could be
taken on the matter. This was agreed. Mayor Flannery read the motions submitted and a
roll call vote was taken:
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
"Section 183 - Proposal for disposal of Lands at Dun na Mara, Renmore"
In Favour: 9
Against: 8
Absent: 1
The Motion was carried.
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty called for a roll call vote which was supported by Cllr. F Fahy and Cllr. D.
Lyons.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
"l propose that we reject the Section 183".
Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
In Favour: 8: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. M. Lohan,
Lyons, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. J. Walsh
Cllr. D.
Against: 9: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M.J Crowe,
. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. O
McNelis.
Cllr. N.
Absent: 1: Cllr. P. Keane
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed:
Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded:
Cllr. N. Larkin
"Section 183 — Proposal for I propose that we reject the Section 183".
In Favour: 9: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M.J Crowe,
Against:
Absent:
Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. N. McNelis.
8: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. M. Lohan,
Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. J. Walsh
1: Cllr. P. Keane
The Motion was defeated.
The meeting was adjourned at 7.45 p.m. for 15 minutes to allow for a break. The Meeting
resumed at 8.00 p.m.
7
2(d) Consideration of setting a local adjustment factor for the Local Property Tax. S.20
Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012, as amended by S. 5 Finance (Local Property Tax)
Act 2013
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Farrell that Notion of Motion NOM 17/17 be taken with Item
2(d). This was seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan and agreed.
The Chief Executive advised Councillors that it was taken that the Report issued by Ms. E.
McCormack, Head of Finance was considered as read. A discussion was held among
Councillors regarding the Local Property Tax and a number of queries were raised and
clarifications sought, which Ms. E. McCormack replied to. Following further debate a
proposal was put forward by Cllr. D. Lyons not to adjust the base rate and leave as is and
this was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty. A vote was requested by Cllr. D. Lyons and
seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan on the two motions and following this a vote was taken on the
two motions:
NOM 17/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
4th September, 2017.
"Galway City Council believes that the Local Property Tax is nothing more than another
austerity measure and chooses to stand with the people of Galway by calling for its abolition.
This Council will use the powers available to it and reduce the local property tax by 15%".
Proposed: Cllr. M. Farrell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
In Favour: 5
Against: 12
Absent: 1
The Motion was defeated.
"No variation in setting of the Local Property Tax. under S.20 Finance (Local Property Tax)
Act 2012, as amended by S. 5 Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2013"
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
In Favour: 12
Against: 5
Absent: 1
The Motion was passed.
2 (e) To set a date for the Annual Statutory Budget 2018 Meeting
Mayor Flannery requested Councillors consideration to set a date for the Annual Statutory
Budget Meeting and following discussion a vote was taken on the proposed date of Monday
20th November 2017 at 4.00 pm
In Favour: 15
Against: 2
Absent: 1
The Date for the Budget meeting on Monday 20th November 2017 at 4.00 p.m. was agreed.
8
2 (f) Approval of Overdraft Accommodation for 2018
Mayor Flannery referred Councillors to the report issued under this Item by Ms. E.
McCormack, Head of Finance seeking approval for overdraft accommodation in 2018.
The approval seeking overdraft accommodation as outlined in the report was proposed by
Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell. A vote was taken on the matter.
"Approval of Overdraft Accommodation for 2018"
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
In Favour: 17
Absent: 1
Against: O
The approval of overdraft was unanimously agreed.
2 (g) Irish Public Bodies — Retained Earnings Distribution.
Ms. E. McCormack presented a report to the meeting, following which contributions were
received from Councillors. Following clarification to queries raised, the following Motion was
raised for consideration by Cllr. O. Crowe:
Seconded: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Proposed: Cllr. O. Crowe
"That 1.6million from the 1.9million that's being received by Galway City Council in 2017
from Irish Public Bodies be ring fenced for the resurfacing and general works required for
Galway City Centre including Shop Street to bring it up to the standard required.
Furthermore, I call on Transport & Infrastructure Section with Galway City Council with
immediate effect to commence the planning and design stage and should remain on
Agenda until Elected Members approve works"
In Favour: 17
Against: O
Absent: 1
The Motion was passed.
The Mayor proposed that Item 4(g) be taken after Item 2(h) on the Agenda and this was
agreed.
2 (h) Section 2 — Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Galway City Bye-Laws, No. 1 — 2017
(HOUSING ESTATES SLOW ZONES).
The Mayor referred Councillors to the report issued by the Transportation section.
Following debate and clarification it was agreed that a review of these Bye-Laws will be
carried out after a period of implementation, the Councillors unanimously proposed and
seconded the adoption of the Bye-Laws.
In Favour: 17
Against: O
Absent: 1
9
4(g) Draft Special Speed Limits Bye-laws 2017 — City Wide
The Members considered the Report on the draft Special Speed Limits Bye-laws 2017 - City
Wide and approved that the draft document be put on public display and to revert back to
the Council.
In Favour: 17
Against: O
Absent: 1
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Report from Environment, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee -
Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2017
Deferred
(b) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 10th February, 2017
Deferred
(c) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 19th June, 2017
Deferred
(d) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 8th September, 2017
Deferred
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Chief Executive's Report for September 2017
Deferred
(b) Draft Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities 2017
Deferred
(c) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th June 2017
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development.
Items (i) to (iv) deferred
(d) European Capital of Culture, 2020
Deferred
(e) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17
Deferred
(f) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway
Deferred
(g) Section 4 — Report on Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Galway City Bye-Laws
- (CITY WIDE REVIEW)
Noted
10
(h) To hear update on the Cultural Strategy
At this point, the time was 8.45 p.m. and the formal meeting finished.
Prior to departure, the Chief Executive informed Councillors that he would like to update
them on the Cultural Strategy. He advised the Councillors of the imminent transfer of the
former Saint Anne's home at Lenaboy Castle, Taylors Hill and confirmed its future use as a
children's and young people's creative hub.
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer delivered a presentation to Councillors and he
outlined information in relation to a draft Heads of Agreement, the transfer of Lenaboy
Castle and the transfer of a payment from the Sisters of Mercy in the amount of €750,000
which will be a contribution towards the refurbishment of the castle.
The Mayor and Councillors expressed their satisfaction with this positive development with
the Mayor extended congratulations to all parties involved.
(i) BREXIT
(i) Impacts / preparation / planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from Brexit
Items j (i) and (ii) were deferred
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
Notices of Motion hereunder were deferred.
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities
NOM 23/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
3rd October, 2016.
"l call on the Chief Executive to earmark and designate the 1.4 acre site in the Westside as a
Cultural and Artistic hub to cater for a mix of organisations specialising with children and
youth".
11
NOM 01/ 17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr D. McDonnell
3rd January 2017
"l hereby propose that a variation of the City Development Plan is initiated forthwith to
provide for the re-zoning of lands of 1.2 acres at Greenfields, Newcastle, in the ownership of
Rory Rogers c/o McCarthy Keville O'Sullivan, block 1, Financial Services Building,
Moneenagheisha Road, Galway. The proposed variation is in the interest of proper planning
and sustainable development and having regard to the housing crisis that currently exists in
Galway City."
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open.
We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
NOM 3/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. J. Walsh
25th January, 2017
"l am calling on Galway City Council to expedite the preparation of the Draft Local Area Plan
for Ardaun. These lands have been identified as one of the major urban housing delivery
sites with a potential yield of 500 units in the medium term subject to progress on the Local
Area Plan".
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible".
12
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil no ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur
chun cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural
Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council meeting on 10th April, 2017 and requested
to be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees.
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the
full Council for consideration
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing
a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
13
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free
to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches.
This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which
belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State
investment from taxpayer money".
NOM 15/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
29th August, 2017.
"l call on Galway City Council to formally make an application for grant funding under the
Department of Justice and Equality Community Based CCTV Scheme in order to provide
CCTV cameras at Woodquay-Steamers Quay in order to combat anti-social behaviour and in
the interest of public safety. If the application be successful the cameras then be installed in
consultation with Woodquay Residents Association".
NOM 16/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. T. O Flaherty
4th September, 2017.
"l call on this Council to make an application for grant aid funding for Community Based
CCTV from the Department of Justice and Equality for the provision of the long awaited
cameras for Walter Macken Place, Mervue, Coilte and Sruthan Mhuirlinne, Ballybane.
This new scheme is intended to support local communities who wish to have the installation
of CCTV security systems installed with the aim of increasing public safety which will help to
deter illegal anti social behaviour activities in their areas '
NOM 18/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
6th March, 2017.
"That Galway City Council seek the approval of Galway County Council for the use of Galway
Airport as a temporary Halting Site to alleviate the immediate problems with the Halting Site
in Carrowbrowne/Cul Trå".
6. QUESTIONS
QI/17
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
February, 2017.
Date Received:
Can I please have an update on the water Safety Audit for Galway City that was requested
over 12 months ago. When will it be published, distributed. What are the plans for it. Who
is the point of contact that will be working to deliver safety works. What is/has been the
delay in getting the audit done. Who is in charge of audit in City Hall.
This has been a very sad year again for the amount of persons who have entered the water
across the city, I have been working with a number of groups who are trying to put in place
a system to recover victims quicker. The next step is prevention.
Item 6. Deferred.
14
7. CORRESPONDENCE
None.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations.
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower.
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017.
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway. Further reply to
issue.
Letter from C. O'Connor, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 4th August 2017
Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and County Council.
Above Items (a) to (e) deferred.
9. CONFERENCES
Conferences and Approved Training Events listed were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by
Cllr. B. Cameron.
1)
2)
3)
Title: Scoil Samhraidh an Phiarsaigh 2017
Date: 27th - 29th July
Venue: Ros Muc, Co. na Gaillimhe - Notification already circulated 18th July 2017
Title: National Tourism Conference
Date: 5th - 6th September 2017
Venue: Listowel Arms Hotel, The Square, Listowel, Co. Kerry — Notification already
circulated 17th August 2017
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. M. Lohan
Title: NFLA All Ireland Forum, Autumn Energy Policy Seminar 2017
Irish energy policy, renewable futures, Brexit & nuclear preparedness — what
Councils need to know
Date: 22nd September 2017
Venue: Meeting Room, County Council Offices, Buvinda House, Dublin Road,
Athlumney, Navan, Co. Meath.
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. C. Connolly
15
4)
5)
6)
Title: Irish Council for Social Housing Biennial National Social Housing Conference
Date: 27th - 28th September 2017
Venue: Limerick Strand Hotel, Limerick
Title: Celtic Conferences - A Practical Guide to Budget 2018
Date: 13th - 15th October 2017
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. B. Cameron
Title: Celtic Conferences — What does a hard Brexit mean for Ireland
Date: 20th - 22nd October 2017
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. M. Lohan
Approved Training
1)
2)
3)
Title: Irish Planning Institute — Energy in Agriculture 2017
Date: 22nd August 2017
Venue: Gurteen College, Ballingarry, Roscrea, Tipperary
circulated 18th August 2017
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. P. Conneely
Title: AILG Training — Wellbeing for Councillors
Date: 19th September 2017
Venue: Ard Ri House Hotel, Tuam, Co. Galway
Notification already
The following Councillors were approved to attend the Cork venue:
Cllr's. P. Conneely, F. Fahy, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty, B. Cameron, N. McNelis and
O. Crowe
Title: Irish Planning Institute — Autumn Planning Conference
Date: 6th October 2017
Venue: Gibson Hotel, Dublin 1
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr's. P. Conneely and O. Crowe
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Dr. Sean O'Donnell (RIP)
Mrs. May Knight (RIP)
Mrs. Anne Keating (RIP)
Votes of Congratulations:
Congratulations to Dr. Ciarån Ö hÖgartaigh on appointment as new President of NUI
Galway.
16
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Ordinary City Council Meeting of 9th October 2017 to be held in the Aula Maxima
Boardroom, Quadrangle, National University of Ireland, Galway.
Noted.
• Replacement of Member on the Environment, Recreation & Amenity Strategic
Policy Committee Representative.
The Mayor referred to letter submitted regarding a replacement on the SPC as follows:
"Ms. Caroline Sweeney replace Mr. Edwin Brennan, following his resignation as
Member of the Environment, Recreation & Amenity Strategic Policy Committee
Representative"
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Walsh
The meeting ended at 8.45 pm.
Seconded by: T. O' Flaherty
s, Co
Signed
Mayor M Galway
17
