Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in the Galmont Hotel, Lough
Atalia and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 11th October, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; E. Hoare; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor & T.
O'Flaherty
Councillors: l. Byrne; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; N. Larkin; D. Lyons & D.
McDonnell
Councillor: M. Cubbard
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
MS.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
E. Humphreys, Senior Executive Architect
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
P. Greene, Director of Services
P. Philbin, Director of Services
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Johnstone, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. J. Farrell, Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. L. Sharkey, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator welcomed all and commenced with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment
of silent reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line
with the agreed protocol for meetings.
Minutes, Confirmed & Signa
Mayor of Galway
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to take a roll call of Councillors attending both present physically and
online at the meeting as follows:
Roll Call at the start of the meeting
Present: Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; O. Hanley; E. Hoare; N. McNelis;
N. Murphy; M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Present Virtually: Councillors: l. Byrne; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; N. Larkin; D. Lyons & D. McDonnell
Absent at the start of the meeting: Councillors: M. Cubbard; F. Fahy & P. Keane
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting and suggested the consideration of the Agenda as
laid out. She advised that she wished for Notice of Motion 40/2021 to be considered at 4.40pm
and referred to a motion for the purposes of dealing with urgent business submitted by Cllr. A.
Cheevers and requested that this be considered at the adjournment meeting scheduled for
Monday 18th October. She also referred to Correspondence Item 7(f) from F6rsa/Siptu/Connect
Trade Union be considered. This was agreed.
Motion submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with
urgent business by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Supported By: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. M. Cubbard;
Cllr. M. O' Connor; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. C. Higgins & Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. P. Keane
Calling on Galway City Council recreation and amenities department to host town hall meetings
with sports clubs and community groups by zoom in relation to the Galway City Council review
of recreation and amenity facilities across the city.
Not Considered.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th September 2021 and adjournment
meeting held on 27th September 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters arising on the minutes individually for
the two dates of the meeting:
13th September 2021
No matters of accuracy.
Under matters arising, Cllr. D. Lyons advised that at the meeting of 13th September he requested
that the Special meeting on 20th September be called to consider the Chief Executive Reports
together with the Quarterly Reports not as was listed on the agenda for same: 1. Quarterly Reports
Reports. Mayor C. Connolly advised that this was noted previously.
2
27th September 2021
Mr. G. McMahon, Meeting Administrator referred to the 4th paragraph on pg 9 of the minutes and
advised that it was agreed at the Special Meeting on 20th September rather than the 13th September
to consider the individual Quarterly reports along with elements of the Chief Executive Reports
relating to same. This was noted.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to PIO of the minutes where he requested to speak on an amendment Motion
that he submitted and was ruled out of order and he requested a debate on the matter. He also
referred to a comment by Ms. P. Philbin, Deputy Chief Executive at the bottom of pg 9 where she
advised that any cycleway, temporary or permanent will require planning consent. He sought
clarification on this comment and what are the steps to be taken going forward.
Mayor C. Connolly thanked the executive for a recent information workshop regarding the Active
Travel Schemes due to go for consultation and queried if a similar workshop could be facilitated for
the public.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that there are a number of possible options for the delivery
of a cycleway, as relevant, including under Section 38 or other provisions of the Road Traffic Act or
under Part 8 or Part 10 of the Planning and Development Regulations.
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services gave a comprehensive update to Councillors regarding provision
of cycleways and relevant legislation; thresholds and exemptions involved. He referred to a recent
relevant Court ruling which he advised is currently under appeal. He confirmed that there must be
a specified start and end date for a temporary cycleway and that that works must be reversible.
Councillors discussed matters relating to cycleways and indicated that if this information was
provided before the consideration of the Motion on the salthill Cycleway, it may have shone a
different light on it.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe suggested that a Special Meeting be considered for consideration of cycling as he
felt it was unfairly dominating the agenda of Ordinary Meetings.
Mayor C. Connolly requested a Report on the Salthill Cycleway in advance of the November Ordinary
meeting to include a start and end date for a cycleway and confirmation that a six month period be
considered for the temporary cycleway.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th September 2021 and adjournment meeting held
on the 27th September 2021
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
3
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 20th September 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising.
No matters of accuracy.
Under Matters Arising Cllr. N. McNelis referred to pg 2 of the minutes and requested that there be
no works completed on a bus shelter location on the Cappagh Road until there is consultation with
residents regarding same. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
The Chief Executive referred to a legal letter received on this matter and requested that it not be
discussed further until consideration is given to same.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 20th September 2021
his Minutes were agreed and adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to Motions passed at previous Council meetings and the status of same.
The Meetings Administrator advised that all Motions are tracked on a database and responses
received are circulated to Councillors.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Request to Council for Overdraft Accommodation 2022
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To approve the request to Council for Overdraft Accommodation 2022 in the amount of
€8 million, as per report circulated on 6th October 2021.
his was approved unanimously.
2(b) Part 8 Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) - Residential Development at
Merlin Park, Galway (Planning Ref. LA 1/21)
Mr. E. Humphreys, Senior Executive Architect gave a presentation to Council on the proposed
development at Merlin Park.
Councillors welcomed the new proposed development and matters raised included: how do persons
register and general criteria on income levels; the need for an information campaign; start date and
timelines for completion of scheme; cost of units; if wastewater treatment pump will be completed;
will Council have to pay development levies; concerns regarding increase in traffic volume for the
current access and clarification regarding longer term access road; request for traffic calming
measures in the Coillte Mhuirlinne area; matter of no access from Castle Park; breakdown of unit
4
sizes and the option for two bed units; access for disabled persons with reference to steep inclines;
the need for parking provision for créche pickup/drop-offs; query as to what blockages to delivery
of construction projects in a timely manner; the viability of office spaces; open space requirements
and the need for quality finishes on exterior works including gutters.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested the consideration of NOM 39/2021 that he submitted, without debate.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty suggested that there be no provision of seating in the estate; due to her
experience of misuse of same. Cllr. M. O'Connor suggested that residents be consulted regarding
seating locations.
Mayor C. Connolly requested that all Councillors should be invited to briefings on Part VIII
Developments for Affordable and Social Housing, rather than just Councillors in the relevant area
ward.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed that the matter raised by Mayor C. Connolly and Part VIII briefings be
referred to Procedures Committee for consideration. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Mr. T. Prendergast, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised. He advised that if there ARE
complaints from residents regarding the misuse of seating that their removal could be considered
from an estate management perspective, if necessary.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive gave a commitment that a Traffic Management Intervention will be
included for the wider development.
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to take a roll call vote. It was advised that Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. C.
Higgins had lost connectivity. In line with Standing Orders a period of up to 15 minutes was allowed
to make every effort to re-establish a connection.
Mayor C. Connolly advised the meeting that Cllr. C. Higgins had lost connectivity and would not be
re-joining the meeting. Cllr. F. Fahy regained connection to cast his vote.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
That Galway City Council approves the Merlin Woods Part VIII Development for Affordable and
Social Housing as proposed per Report circulated on 6th October 2021.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Part VIII development at Merlin Woods was approved unanimously.
5
Mayor C. Connolly referred to NOM 40/2021 regarding the delivery of a New Deal for Early Years in
Budget 2022 and also a motion submitted by Cllr. N. McNelis on the same matter as a motion for
dealing with urgent business. This was not considered.
Motion submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Supported By: Cllr. I. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. C. Higgins;
Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Galway City Council supports a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022, and in doing so propose
that a letter is sent on behalf of Galway City Council to both Minister O'Gorman and Minister
McGrath asking them both to support a new deal for Early Years by increasing Government
investment in Budget 2022 in order to deliver quality care and education for our children, our
workers, parents and providers.
Not Considered
Mayor C. Connolly referred to Correspondence Item No. 7(f) from Försa / Siptu / Connect Trade
Union and proposed that a workshop be facilitated on this matter. This was seconded by Cllr. N.
McNelis.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to the workload in the coming months and proposed that this be re-
considered after Christmas. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Mayor C. Connolly advised that attendance at the workshop is not compulsory.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe suggested the matter be referred back to the Procedures Committee.
2(c) Part 8 Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) - Residential Development at
211 Tirellan Heights, Galway (Planning Ref. LA 2/21)
Councillors noted the report circulated.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
To approve Part 8 Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) - Residential
Development at 211 Tirellan Heights, Galway (Planning Ref. LA 2/21) per Report circulated on
6th October 2021.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Part VIII development at 211 Tirellan Heights was approved unanimously.
6
2(d) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Manor Avenue, Kingston (part), Galway
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Declaration of roads to be public roads - Manor Avenue, Kingston (part), Galway, as per report
circulated on 6th October 2021.
This was approved unanimously.
2(e) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Breacån, Letteragh Road, Galway
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Declaration of roads to be public roads - Breacån, Letteragh Road, Galway as per report
circulated on 6th October 2021.
This was approved unanimously.
It was agreed that agenda item 4(a)(i) Housing Quarterly Report and Housing issues in the Chief
Executive's Reports under agenda item 4(g) be considered as the first item at the adjournment
meeting scheduled on Monday 18th October.
The Meeting concluded at 4.55pm.
7
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in the Galmont Hotel, Lough
Atalia and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 18th October, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard;
O. Hanley; P. Keane; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis;
& M. O'Connor
Councillors: l. Byrne; F. Fahy; E. Hoare; N. Larkin;
D. Lyons; N. Murphy & T. O'Flaherty
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
P. Philbin, Director of Services
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services
D. Mahon, Director of Services
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
D. Smyth, Head of Finance
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Lehmann, Tourism Officer
Mr. R
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. L. Sharkey, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Mr. S. Healy, Interim Communications & Media Officer
Mr. G. McMahon welcomed all to the meeting and proceeded to take a roll call of attendees both
present physically and online at the meeting as follows:
Roll Call at the start of the meeting
Present: Councillors: A. Cheevers; C. Connolly; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard;
O. Hanley; D. McDonnell & M. O'Connor
Present Virtually: Councillors: l. Byrne; F. Fahy; E. Hoare; N. Larkin; D. Lyons; N. Murphy & T.
O'Flaherty
Absent at the start of the meeting: Councillors: C. Higgins; P. Keane & N. McNelis
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed that Agenda Item 3(a) Report & Recommendations on Marketing Fund
2021 be considered by Council, without debate.
8
Mayor C. Connolly proposed an amendment motion that agenda item 3(a) remain on the agenda
and be considered at a later date.
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to take a roll call vote on the matter. In line with Standing Orders the
amendment shall be put first:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. P. Keane
That agenda item 3(a) remain on the agenda and considered at a later date.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J Crowe;
Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
Against: Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D.
McDonnell & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 9 Against: 7 Abstain: O Present: 16
The amendment was affirmed.
In line with Standing Orders, when an amendment is affirmed it becomes the substantive motion.
Mr. Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to take a roll call vote on the motion:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. P. Keane
That agenda item 3(a) remain on the agenda and considered at a later date.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
Against: Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 11 Against: 5 Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was carried.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Report & Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2021
Deferred.
9
9. CONFERENCES
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
That approved training and conferences be approved. This was agreed.
Approved Training:
(a) Title: AILG Module 1 2021 — "Government Decision on the Reform on Remuneration
Payable to Local Authority Elected Members and Update on Planning and Development
Bill 2021 and other Planning Matters"
Venue: The Rose Hotel, Tralee, Co. Kerry / The Tower Hotel & Leisure Centre,
Waterford / Co. Wicklow / Sligo Park Hotel / Horse & Jockey Hotel, Thurles, Co.
Tipperary / The Shearwater Hotel, Ballinasloe, Co. Galway
Date: 16th September / 18th September / 23rd September / 2nd October / 5th October /
7th October 2021
(RETROSPECTIVE)
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty
(b) Title: LAMA Autumn Training Seminar
Venue: Sligo Park Hotel, Pearse Road, Sligo
Date: 3rd & 4th November 2021
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. N. McNelis
Conferences:
(c) Title: Celtic Conferences — Housing for all how will it help people find homes?
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Date: 29th 30th & 31st October 2021
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. J. Connolly & Cllr. E. Hoare
(d) Title: Celtic Conferences — The Fair Deal Scheme — What's the deal with Nursing Home
care?
Venue: O'Donovans Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 5th 6th & 7th November 2021
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations were approved.
Votes of Sympathy
Vinnie Munnelly R.I.P.
Eugene Brett R.I.P.
Bernie McDonagh R.I.P.
Brendan Kennelly R.I.P.
Måire Mhac an tSaoi R.I.P.
10
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Mayor C. Connolly suggested that the Housing Quarterly Report and Housing issues in the Chief
Executive's Reports be considered along with agenda Item 4(b) Housing for All. She suggested that
the reports be taken as read. This was agreed.
4(a) Quarterly Report, July - September 2021
i. Housing
4(b) "Housing for All" — Policy Document
Councillors discussed the Housing Quarterly Report and Housing for All policy document and
matters raised included statistics for minimum inspections of private rented dwelling; vacant
housing stock; that persons on the two bed housing list with children of the same gender be
considered for three bed properties; small number of approvals under the tenant purchase scheme;
purchase policy and targets for 2022; non recoupable contribution fees and request for update on
impact on annual targets; details on vacant land tax; request for maintenance of exterior of the Glen
Oaks accommodation; Choice Based Letting registration and if any refusals; request for access path
and cycling infrastructure to be completed at Keeraun Road development; details regarding costs of
the Westside modular family hub; maintenance issues; liability for same and request to rename
same; new tenancy handbook and if a handbook for landlords; estate management issues and
liaison with the Gardai; cost rental housing; use of derelict homes for social housing; housing
waiting list category breakdown; delays in maintenance; retrofit planning and the need for
resources; removal from the housing list; annual payments to other housing bodies; long waiting
time on the transfer list; Housing Assistance Payments; the issue of Notices to Quit; need for student
accommodation; planning legislation and the need for a policy in the City Development Plan
regarding same; need for bus facilities and footpaths on Circular Road, Ballymoneen and Letteragh
Road; delivery of Traveller Accommodation and CALF scheme; cost of management fees in private
estates; . Councillors complimented the work carried out by the staff of the Housing Department.
Mr. D. McMahon, A/Director of Services responded to queries and clarifications raised by
Councillors.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to NOM 40/2021 and also a motion submitted by Cllr. N. McNelis on the
same matter as a motion for dealing with urgent business. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed some
amendments to the wording of the motion. Due to time constraints, Mayor C. Connolly requested
to leave the motion on the agenda.
Mayor C. Connolly also referred to motions submitted by Cllr. D. McDonnell and motions requested
for consideration by Cllr. J. Connolly and Cllr. D. Lyons.
Motion submitted at the meeting
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Galway City Council call on Minister Darragh O'Brien to ensure that all lending institutions
will play their part to supply finance to applicants under the new Affordable Housing Scheme
and the current Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme, given that there has been no uptake
in the past due to the clawback. For this scheme to work to its full potential will require all
11
lending institutions playing their part to alleviate the current housing crisis and not use the
equity as a reason for refusal of mortgage applications
Not Considered.
4(a) Quarterly Report, July - September 2021 - Not Considered.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
Transport & Infrastructure
4(g) Chief Executive's Report:
(i) September 2021
(ii) October 2021
Housing elements from the Chief Executive's Reports were considered.
4(c) Galway City Council Digital Strategy - Not Considered
4(d) Urban Regeneration Development Fund (URDF) - Not Considered
4(e) Schools' Street Pilot Recommendations - Not Considered
4(f) National Development Plan 2021-2030 - Not Considered
Mayor C. Connolly advised that the next Council meeting is scheduled for Monday 8th
November. Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed the suspension of standing orders so that a matter
could be taken as first item on the agenda in advance of Business Prescribed by Statute.
The meeting ended at 5pm.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
12
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should
be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the N TMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered
NOM 15/2021
Notice•given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered
Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Supported by: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and
Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water
Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works
together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently
being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered
13
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its
own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not Considered
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and
in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission
from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal
quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021 - Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
• Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily
off the road due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of
their condition.
• Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not Considered
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic
Act 2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-
keeping with a cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall
be presented as standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
14
Not Considered
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the
use of automated signage.
Not Considered
NOM 33/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 22nd June 2021
Galway City Council acknowledges the need for a new national maternity hospital (NMH)
to provide the highest quality healthcare in Dublin, and across Ireland.
Galway City Council notes the lack of legal clarity regarding the ownership and management
of the hospital, and also acknowledges the concerns regarding the employment rights of
those who will work in the hospital.
Galway City Council agrees to write to the Minister for Health to call for the proposed new
publicly-funded NMH to be constructed on land owned by the State; and that, to guarantee
its secular ethos, the new facility be fully owned and governed by the State. If this motion
is passed it is agreed that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.
Not Considered
NOM 35/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 5th July 2021
That this Council again calls on the NTA to provide a bus route for Upr. Ballymoneen Road
and engage with operators to deliver same. With two new developments built by City
Council and a third to seek planning and also a new school, it is important that public
transport be made available for residents. It is not appropriate to expect residents to walk
to Western Distributor Road as this does not promote use of public transport.
A copy of this motion to be sent to Minister for Transport.
Not Considered
NOM 37/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 8th September 2021
In order to provide Ball Nets at the GAA pitches in Cappagh Park that Galway City Council
would as a matter of urgency undertake to complete a Stage Two Appropriate Assessment
including a Natura Impact Statement (NIS) as the proposed Ball Nets are located
within/close to an (SPC) Special Area of Conservation and a planning application to An Bord
Pleanåla will be required if the provision of the Ball Nets is to proceed.
Not Considered
NOM 38/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 24th September 2021
15
That Galway City Council will allow members of the public to register to vote via an online
form.
Not Considered
NOM 39/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 3rd October 2021
Galway City Council requests the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage
to ask for a relaxation of the restriction to one beds only for the Housing First Programme
in order that targets can be met.
Not Considered
NOM 40/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 4th October 2021
I propose that Galway City Council supports this motion which is calling on Government to
deliver a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022.
The pandemic has shown us just how crucial Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) is
for parents, children and the economy. However, the sector is in crisis. Low levels of
government investment and a broken funding system have resulted in poverty pay for
professionals, high fees for parents and high staff turnover as services struggle to recruit
and retain workers. This approach is undermining quality for children.
• Irish Government investment in the Early Years Sector lags far behind other
European Countries.
• Irish parents pay the highest fees in Europe the average weekly fee for full-time
childcare is €186.
• The average hourly pay for Early Years Educators is €11.91.
• The average staff turnover is 40% in full day services per year.
In Budget 2022, the Government can start the transformation of ECEC by increasing
investment and implementing a new funding model so educators are paid a decent wage,
childcare is affordable for parents and these essential services are sustainable into the
future.
I call on Galway City Council to support a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022, and in
doing so I propose that a letter is sent on behalf of Galway City Council to both Minister
O'Gorman and Minister McGrath asking them both to support a new deal for Early Years by
increasing Government investment in Budget 2022 in order to deliver quality care and
education for our children, our workers, parents and providers.
Not Considered
16
NOM 41/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 2nd October 2021
The Irish Society for Colitis & Crohn's Disease is a patient-to-patient support group for
over 40,000 people who are living with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) in Ireland.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease describes a group of conditions in which the intestines
become inflamed. The two most common inflammatory bowel diseases are Crohn's
disease and ulcerative colitis.
Living with IBD can be a daily struggle, traveling outside the home has always been a
challenge for many people living with IBD.
The Irish Society for Colitis and Crohn's Disease is calling on all County Councils and the
Department of Health to recognise our ttNo Waiting" card, to support people in the
community with IBD gaining urgent access to a nearby toilet.
Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 16/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd June 2021
What works are required to enable Galway City Council to remove the Perspex sheeting
surrounding the Browne Doorway and ensure the safe continued display of the doorway at
its current location in Eyre Square? Can costings be provided for the required work?
Question 21/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 26th September 2021
Following the publication of the Night-Time Economy Taskforce recommendations will the
Council make provision for a Night-Time Economy Advisor in Draft Budget 2022 as well
progressing a Night-Time Economy committee? And is there scope to carry forward or
prevail of any potential underspend in festival funding this year arising from public health
restrictions, such as the 70,000 allocated to St. Patricks' Day 2021, to plan and fund an
expanded St. Patricks' Day 2022 with additional night-time activities or otherwise offer
support to the night-time economy in 2022
Question 22/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 4th October 2021
Will the Executive be conducting a public workshop as part of the non-statutory
consultation on the Doughiska & Eglingon Canals cycle lanes.
Response issued on 8th October 2021
Question 23/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. Murphy
Date Received: 30th September 2021
In response to a previous question from Cllr. Higgins, councillers were informed that
€80,000 had been allocated by the NTA in 2021 for advancing a "Silverstrand to City Centre
Walking Cycleway". Has that money been spent. If not, will it be spent by the end of the
17
calendar year, and in light of the September motion on advancing a cycleway on Salthill
Prom, will that money be spent any differently.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Correspondence dated 10th September 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 15th September 2021 received from Clare County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 16th September 2021 received from Meath County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 20th September 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
(e) Correspondence dated 1st October 2021 received from Rita Ann Higgins — copy attached.
(f) Correspondence dated 1st October 2021 to Mayor Colette Connolly from F6rsa / Siptu / Connect
Trade Union
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
18