Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 11thDecember, 2017 at 4.00 p.m.
in Galway City Council, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh
Mr B.
. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. T.
Connell, Director of Services,
Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms. E.
Philbin A/Director of Services,
Ms. p.
Moggan, A/Head of Finance,
Ms. N.
Mr. U.
Finn, Senior Engineer,
Rohan, A/Meetings Administrator,
Ms. A.
Ms. A.
Bhreathnach, Staff Officer.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 13th November
2017
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron.
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to Votes taken at the in committee meeting that was held in
advance of the Ordinary November meeting and advised that they were not recorded.
Mayor Flannery confirmed that details of meetings held in committee are not recorded
publicly in minutes.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to the Council's updated policy pursuant to Section 183 of the
Local Government Act relating to disposal of lands owned by Galway City Council. Cllr. D.
McDonnell advised that he suggested, rather than confirmed, that the policy agreed is that
any proposed newspaper advertisement could be considered and decided upon by the full
Council and this was confirmed by the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath.
A synopsis of matters arising and clarifications raised by Councillors were as follows:
Update on commitment of funding for Ballinfoile Community Centre, including
commitment to ringfence funds for the purchase of capital items of equipment;
Request for update on any proposed halting site in the City;
Update on new burial ground site and if a crematorium will be included;
Update on advisory group on amalgamation of Galway City and County Councils;
1
Request for 24 hour security at Corrib Great Southern site;
Update on the request for the Minister of Transport to attend Galway City regarding
the Galway City Ring Road and the designation of Galway Port under the National
Port Strategy;
Request for details of expenditure on grants for persons with disabilities, number of
applications approved and not funded;
Request for schedule on upgrading of playgrounds, in particular Sliding Rock;
Referral to Civic Reception for Dr. J. Browne and noting equality tribunal underway;
Graffiti Policy update;
Request for confirmation if the transfer of St. Annes, Lenaboy is part of the
Residential Institutional Redress Act;
Update on Interagency Traveller meeting to be held;
Request for a written report on sports capital grant at Cappagh Park;
Request for a response to Question 01/17 submitted by Cllr. N. McNelis.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services, Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, Ms. P. Philbin,
A/Director of Services and the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave comprehensive replies to
matters arising and clarifications sought.
The Minutes were adopted.
(b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 20th November
2017
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to a Notice of Motion she submitted "That Galway City Council
install signage in Council cemeteries to provide a plot map with a numbering system that
will refer to a register of all those buried therein" and advised that this was agreed
unanimously. Cllr. C. Connolly requested that the minutes reflect that a litter bin that was
removed from the Claddagh area will be replaced.
Ms. A. Rohan, A/Meetings Administrator confirmed that no formal Vote was taken regarding
Cllr. C. Connolly's motion but it would be recorded in the minutes that there was general
agreement on the motion.
Cllr. M. Lohan referred to pg 4 of Minutes where Mayor Flannery proposed a Motion "That
Galway City Council extend its sponsorship scheme for Public amenities to include
Playgrounds for 2018 and advertise for expressions of interest". Cllr. Lohan advised that he
did not agreed to same.
Ms. Rohan confirmed that no formal Vote was taken on Cllr. P. Flannery's motion but that
the minutes would reflect that there was general agreement and not unanimous agreement
regarding same.
2
A synopsis of matters arising and clarifications raised by Councillors were as follows:
Derelict Sites — request for update.
Waterways and conditional assessment and allocation of €50,000, included in the 2018
Annual Budget;
Query if motion raised by Cllr. F. Fahy regarding the disposal of paint and the Consumer
Responsibility Initiative was distributed to the Department and all Local Authorities as
requested;
Signage to Dog Pound;
Request for update on status of Ballyloughane beach and the removal of red flag;
Discussion regarding CCTV policy, clarification regarding installation; use of CCTV to
monitor illegal dumping, maintenance, resourcing and reference to Data Protection
Regulations; query if applications have been made to Gardai for CCTV and whether CCTV
is a Local Authority or Garda requisition;
Playgrounds and condemnation of vandalism;
Update on Sports Capital Grants and request for clarification of type of works involved in
Phase Ill of Corrib Park development;
Cllr. P. Keane referred to a Notice of Motion he submitted in relation to Kingston &
Southpark Masterplans and requested an update on same in the Chief Executive's
Report for January;
Reference to Minor Flood Relief meeting and the boom that is deployed when needed
to the Spanish Arch area, which is visually unappealing; request for defence wall or glass
wall over the key wall similar to Waterford;
Reference to Office of Public Works flood mitigation measures;
Update on Vacant Homes Scheme and if the City Council are promoting same.
Mayor Flannery made reference to the Notice of Motion he proposed regarding the
enforcement of byelaws in the Salthill area. He confirmed that he did not brand the
Promenade as tatty, as he alleged was reported by local media. He referred to the Minutes
of the November Ordinary Meeting and he referred to illegally parked caravans and
overnight parking of advertising vehicles along the walking areas of the promenade which
were destroying the scenic amenity. He advised that he said that the ongoing parking of
such advertising structures made the area appear 'tatty' by detracting from the scenic
amenity of the area.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services, Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services and the Chief
Executive, Mr. McGrath gave replies to matters arising and clarifications sought.
The Minutes were adopted.
(c) Minutes of Statutory Budget Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 20th
November 2017
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
3
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. N. Larkin confirmed his attendance at the meeting which was not reflected in the
Minutes with Cllr. B. Cameron listed in attendance in error. The Meetings Administrator
affirmed that the Minutes will be suitably adjusted. A general discussion ensued regarding
the Statutory Budget Meeting and the Budget that was adopted.
A synopsis of matters arising and clarifications raised by Councillors were as follows:
Discussion on the equity of Budget to all citizens of Galway City;
Compliments to the Executive regarding monies for works on the City's three castles
and request for a date of commencement of works on same and Browne doorway;
Request for update on timeframe for accessibility study for Menlo pier with reference
to staffing issues;
Reference to former staff on the Gateway programme at Westside pitch and query as to
what resources will in future be allocated to this work; request for clarification
regarding adopted budget of €30,000 for part-time staff and if this is for Westside pitch.
The Chief Executive advised that some of the monies are for the provision of staffing in
the Westside pitch;
Reference to pg 4 and funding provided for three no. hurling walls at a cost of €46,300.
The Budget was adopted prior to the announcement of the Sports Capital Grants for
2017 which included funding for a hurling wall in the Westside. Cllr. B. Cameron
requested that hurling walls be built in other Wards and requested that an application
be made again for hurling walls under the Sports Capital Grants Scheme for 2018;
Request for the hurling walls to be built in the Spring 2018;
Reference to funds for Ballinfoile being carried over to 2018.
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services confirmed that supply of agreed capital equipment for
the Ballinfoile Community Centre was being advanced. The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath
gave comprehensive replies to matters arising and clarifications sought.
The Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) To discuss a Report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/2017, passed at Galway City Council
Special Meeting on 23rd January 2017. 'Propose that a variation of the City Development
Plan is initiated forthwith to provide for the re-zoning of lands of 1.2 acres at Greenfields,
Newcastle - Circulated December 2017.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested the Notice of Motion passed at the Special Council Meeting on
23rd January 2017 be withdrawn. Mayor Flannery proceeded to take a Vote:
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
"That Notice of Motion 01/17 passed at the Special Council Meeting on 23rd January 2017
be withdrawn".
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed unanimously.
4
(b) Resolution of the Council to raise a loan - Capital Allocation for Publicly Funded
Housing Loans
Mayor Flannery referred to Item 2 (b) Resolution of the Council to raise a loan - Capital
Allocation for Publicly Funded Housing Loans and Report circulated. A Vote was then taken
on the matter:
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron.
"To Raise a loan of €500,000 from the Department of Housing, Planning & Local
Government, through the Housing Finance Agency, for the purpose of issuing loans to
first-time buyers under the Home Purchase Loans Scheme"
In Favour: 17 Against: O
Abstain: O
Present: 17
The raising of a loan was approved unanimously.
(c) 2018-2020 Three Year Capital Programme.
A synopsis of matters arising regarding the three year capital programme raised by
Councillors were as follows:
Request for a footbridge adjoining existing Salmon Weir Bridge;
Request for an update on new Burial Ground;
Reference to City Library and feasibility study on the renting property in Augustine
Street;
Request for update on Blackbox site;
Request for more detail on bus prioritisation route on the Dublin Road near Merlin Park
and if an environmental study will come before Council;
A number of Councillors welcomed the retrofitting of housing stock; request for details
regarding average length of time to complete extensions to local authority housing;
query if the programme includes insulation to counteract dampness. It was confirmed
that current retrofitting works are for windows and doors;
General bus stop upgrades/shelters; request for a bus shelter near Community Centre
on the Seamus Quirke Road;
Preliminary Roads Report for proposed improvement to Ballindooley Cross junction,
query whether any land swap has been advanced and if a design is imminent; query
whether funding has been requested from the Department, and if so the amount of
funding and if not received does the City Council have an alternative plan;
Reference to Housing on Pg 3, request for update on Keeraun and if an application has
been made to the Department;
A number of Councillors welcomed the expansion of the Coca Cola Zero bike scheme. A
report was requested in relation to bike station locations and future expansion plans,
including a request for an extension to Salthill with a bike station in proximity to the
Promenade. A further report was requested on the provision of bicycle stations provided
by Galway City Council for parking of bikes, other than those included in the Bike Share
Scheme;
Reference to Water Services regarding the rising main at Tonabrocky;
Request for an update on Coastal Protection from Silver Strand to Sailin; reference to
works carried out and request for a boardwalk between Tobar Éanna & Lough Roisin;
5
Request for an update on housing lands including McHale lands on the Monivea Road
and Ballyburke lands granted planning permission by An Bord Pleanåla;
Request for date of submission of Galway City Ring Road Scheme to An Bord Pleanåla;
Reference to Skerritt roundabout at Galway Mayo Institute of Technology and inclusion
in the Capital Report;
Funding for Bruach na Coiribe. It was confirmed that funding was included in the
Revenue Budget;
Compliments to the Transport & Infrastructure Department regarding works completed
on repairing foothpaths. Query whether funding has been requested from Government
to repair all foothpaths in the City and reference to the Smarter Travel Initiative;
The Capital Housing programme and extensions for persons with disabilities were
welcomed; details regarding the housing building programme for next five years up to
2022 were requested;
Request for Update on Parkmore and if works will commence on 2nd January 2018. Also,
if there will be a third and further stages to alleviate congestion;
Request for confirmation that right turn at Tuam Road Bus Corridor Scheme will be
retained and a timescale for works;
Request for an update from Galway County Council in relation to the Galway
Moycullen - Clifden Greenway;
Request to incorporate retrofitting and maintenance of traveller halting sites into the
Housing Quarterly Reports. It was advised that Quarterly Reports are removed from
Agenda after two consecutive listings on the Agenda;
Request for a Traffic Management Plan for Dominick Street and Munster Avenue and
request for a response in relation to private parking meters;
Request for update on feasibility study for City East Fire Station;
Reference to potential match funding available to City Sports Clubs that may be seeking
to access sports capital funding from the Department;
Request for more collaboration with National University of Ireland, Galway including
Civic functions.
Request for hydro generation of energy for the City for Street lighting;
Terryland Forest Park Master Plan;
Clarification if there will be a bus route through Galway University hospital site.
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, Mr. U. Finn/Senior Engineer, Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director
of Services, Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services and the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave
comprehensive replies to matters arising.
The Minutes were adopted.
(d) Local Government Auditors Report 2016 and Audit Committee Report.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Item 2 (d), (e) and (f) be deferred and a Vote was taken.
This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
In Favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was agreed unanimously.
6
(e) To fix date to discuss the Chief Executive's Report on submissions in relation to the
Draft Ardaun Local Area Plan.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Item 2 (e) be put on the Agenda for the January Ordinary
Meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and agreed.
Following a discussion, Cllr. P. Conneely proposed that the January Ordinary Meeting
commence at 2 p.m. and that the first Item on the Agenda would be Item 2 (e) Draft
Ardaun Local Area Plan under Business prescribed by Statute. This was seconded by Cllr.
T. O' Flaherty.
In Favour: 12 Against: 6
Abstain: O
Present: 18
It was agreed to commence the January Ordinary Meeting at 2 p.m. with item 2(e) as
first item under Business Prescribed by Statute.
(f) To consider making a submission on the proposed Regional Spatial and Economic
Strategy being prepared by the Northern and Western Regional Assembly.
Following a discussion, Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Item 2 (f) be dealt with as the second
Item on the Agenda at the January Ordinary Meeting under Business prescribed by
Statute. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
In Favour: 18 Against: O
Abstain: O
The Motion was agreed unanimously.
Present: 18
Following this, the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath invited Councillors to attend a workshop at
12 noon on January 8th 2018, in advance of the Ordinary Council meeting at 2 p.m. to discuss
the making a submission on the proposed Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy being
prepared by the Northern and Western Regional Assembly.
(g) To consider a proposed variation of Galway City Development Plan — Kirwan
Roundabout
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner presented to the Meeting. She referred to the
requirements under the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, the public notice
of the proposed variation and she outlined the variation proposed. She outlined a full
summary of the nine submissions/observations received and Chief Executive's opinion and
response to same. She finally recommended to the Elected Members to consider the
proposed Variation and the contents of the Chief Executive Report to make a Variation to
the Galway City Development Plan 2017 — 2023.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer, Transportation & Infrastructure provided further clarification
on the issues contained in the CE's Report, including a presentation to the meeting on the
background, detail and benefits accruing from the proposed improvements to the junction.
Mr. Finn also played a video recording of pedestrian movements across the roundabout and
serious safety issues arising.
7
A lengthy discussion ensued and Councillors gave their individual contributions on the
proposed variation.
A Roll Call Vote was called for by Cllrs. M. Cubbard, C. Connolly and F. Fahy. A Role Call Vote
was taken which resulted as follows:
Present: 18
In Favour: 11 Against: 7 Abstain: O
In Favour: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. P.
Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'
Flaherty & Cllr. J. Walsh.
Against: Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy,
Cllr. M. Farrell & Cllr. M. Lohan.
The proposed Variation was adopted.
3.
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Chief Executive's Report for September 2017
Not Considered.
Chief Executive's Report for October 2017
Not Considered.
Chief Executive's Report for November 2017.
Not Considered.
Chief Executive's Report for December 2017.
Not Considered.
BREXIT
(i) Impacts / Preparation / Planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government.
Not Considered.
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from Brexit.
Not Considered.
(iii) The view form Irish Local Government.
Not Considered.
Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway.
Not Considered.
Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014 — 2016.
Not Considered.
8
5. NOTICE OF MOTION
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open.
We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
NOM 3/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. J. Walsh
25th January, 2017
"l am calling on Galway City Council to expedite the preparation of the Draft Local Area Plan
for Ardaun. These lands have been identified as one of the major urban housing delivery
sites with a potential yield of 500 units in the medium term subject to progress on the Local
Area Plan".
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
9
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an ChomhairleseoarOllscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimhaisghairm a dhéanamhar an
gcinneadh a ghlacsideireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadhGaeilgear a thoilnåar a toil
ag Uachtarån na hOllscoileagus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamhagusGaillimh a churchuncinn
mar chathairdhåtheangach.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural
Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the
full Council for consideration
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received:
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a
Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
10
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received:
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free
to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches.
This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which
belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State
investment from taxpayer money".
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates SliBurca, SliGheal, Leas na Mara, FanaBui, LeitirBurca, MaighBurca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilfn located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
6. QUESTIONS
QI/17
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
February, 2017.
Can I please have an update on the water Safety Audit for Galway City that was requested
over 12 months ago. When will it be published, distributed. What are the plans for it. Who
is the point of contact that will be working to deliver safety works. What is/has been the
delay in getting the audit done. Who is in charge of audit in City Hall.
This has been a very sad year again for the amount of persons who have entered the water
across the city, I have been working with a number of groups who are trying to put in place
a system to recover victims quicker. The next step is prevention.
11
7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
(h)
(k)
(k)
(m)
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway. Further reply to
issue.
Email from C. O'Connor, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Councildated 4th August 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and
County Council
Letter from Mr. Brendan Holland on behalf of Galway City Business Association and
Eyre Square All Ireland Screen Committee.
Letter from M. Cleary, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Offaly County
Council dated 19th September 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Offaly County Council
Letter from T. O'Callaghan, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City
& County Council dated 5th October 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City &
County Council.
Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 6th November 2017 Re: Rugby World Cup 2023 —
Ireland Bid.
Updated Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 21st November 2017 Re: Rugby World
Cup 2023 — Ireland Bid.
Letter from E. Brophy, Meetings, Administrator, Carlow County Council 21st
November 2017
Re: Notice of Motion adopted by Members of Carlow County Council.
Circular LG 07/2017 & Circular LG 8/2017
Expenses and allowances of elected members, and Local Government (Expenses
of Local Authority Members) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (S.I. no. 494/2017).
Re: Update in relation to expenses and allowances for Local Authority Members
from Mr Gary McGuinn, Assistant Principal Officer, Local Government Oversight
and Governance, Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government.
Letter from R. Smyth, Embassy of the United States of America
Re: Acknowledgement of Notice of Motion — Las Vegas, Nevada condolences.
Letter from K. Colreavy, Meetings Administrator, Sligo County Council
Re: Resolution passed by Sligo County Council.
12
8. CONFERENCES
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely.
1)
2)
Title: Celtic Conferences — The Finance Act 2017
Date: 5th 6th& 7th January 2018
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. P. Conneely
Title: Celtic Conferences — Entitlement to Health Services
Date: 19th 20th& 21st January 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. C. Connolly & Cllr. P. Conneely
The Chief Executive referred to the discussion at the end of the Council Meeting that was
held on the 13th November 2017 regarding unused allowances by Councillors in respect of
attendance at conferences and approved training. He advised that Councillor P. Conneely
had sought additional allowance for attendance at the following training events:
Title venue: AILG Training for Elected Members
Date: 18th November 2017
Venue: Dunboyne, Co. Meath
Title venue: Housing in Crisis, Defining the Role of the Councillor
Date: 11th - 12th November 2017
Venue: Wexford
Title venue: AILG Training National Public Library Strategy
Date: 21st October 2017
Venue: Carrick on Shannon
Title venue: AILG Minding Our Mental Health
Date: 23rd September 2017
Venue: Tivoli, Cork
Title venue: Irish Planning Institute
Date: 9th November 2017
Venue: Tallagh, Co. Dublin
Title venue: Irish Planning Institute Autumn Seminar 2017
Date: 6th October 2017
Venue: Gibson Hotel, Dublin
Title venue: Institute of Profession Training
Date: 8th — 10th December
Venue: Gold Coast Hotel, Dungarvan, Co. Waterford
He recommended, subject to Council agreement that a portion of the unused allowance be
provided to Cllr. Conneely to fund attendance at the above events, this was agreed
13
Approved Training
1)
Title: Institute of Professional Training — Insolvency Services in Ireland
Date: 8th 9th& 10th December 2017
Venue: Gold Coast Hotel, Ballincourty, Dungarvan, Co. Waterford
Notification already circulated 16th November 2017
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. P. Conneely & Cllr. M. Lohan
Training Educational Programme
1)
Title: Diploma in Legal Studies
Year: 2017-2019
Venue: Kings Inns, Dublin
Participant: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Harry Begley (RIP)
Ms. Edith Mulhall (RIP)
Mr. Seamus McDonagh (RIP)
Mr. James Laffey (RIP)
Mr. Martin Lynskey (RIP)
Ms. Bridie Conway (RIP)
Votes of Congratulations:
Congratulation to Bishop Kelly on his appointment by Pope Francis as Bishop of Galway,
Kilmacduagh and Kilfenora.
Congratulaions to Brian Kevillee & The Liam Mellows GAA Club on winning the County
Senior Hurling Championship.
10. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting ended at 8.45 p.m.
i
14
Signed
tess (T
Mayo/' uüivtoy