—Minutes of the Ordinary April Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 12th April, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
. E. Fanning, A/Senior Engineer
Ms
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
. S. Connolly, Senior Engineer
Ms
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
J. Harrold, Arts Officer
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a
moment of silent reflection. Mr. McMahon reminded attendees of the agreed protocol for
attendance at meetings which prohibits recording/rebroadcasting of audio or images.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty referred to a response issued to her regarding Q9/2021.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/DoS advised that the response issued was a full response to the question
submitted and confirmed the two locations where basketball courts have been installed in
housing developments in the Eastside of the city.
Mi es,Co r ed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
1
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Request that Agenda item 4(j) Tourism Infrastructure projects being progressed by Galway
City Council in 2021 be given a higher priority and considered as first item under Reports of
Officials due to its importance and impact on all areas of Galway city
This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th March 2021 and adjournment meeting
held on 22nd March 2021
Mayor Cubbard invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Cllr. D. McDonnell confirmed that the areas to which his request for a five year maintenance
plan of roads in older areas of the city includes Bohermore; Claddagh; Mervue and Shantalla.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th March 2021 and
adjournment meeting held on 22nd March 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor Cubbard thanked those who spoke in support of him and his family in relation to recent
events.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC) Annual Report 2020
Councillors discussed the JPC Annual Report and thanked Ms. C. Morgan and team for their
assistance during a challenging year. Matters discussed included the increase in speed fines
issued and statistics.
The Chief Executive informed the Council that the JPC holds an annual public meeting and
that Councillors are welcome to attend same. He also informed the Council that a new
national model for JPC's is currently being piloted in two areas of the country.
Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly
That a member of An Garda Siochåna be invited to attend any future Council meeting where
the Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC) Annual Report is on the Agenda to give
Councillors the opportunity to raise matters.
This was agreed.
2
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
2(a) To note the Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC) Annual Report 2020
This was agreed and the Annual Report was noted.
2(b) Annual Financial Statement for year ending 31st December 2020
Mr. D. Smyth, Head of Finance presented the unaudited AFS for year ending 31st December
2020.
Councillors discussed the document and commended the work of Ms. N. Moggan; Ms. L.
Mitchell and the Finance Department and Audit Committee. Matters raised included
reduction in parking fee income and if this was estimated for; procedure for issuing parking
tickets; restart grants; Government supplementary support; contingencies to deal with
reduction of income from services; query if rates waiver will be extended for the second
quarter of the year; welcoming investment in Housing; COVID support schemes; bad debts;
underspend in the Environment budget; no reference to Galway 2020 in the report; request
for a report on any debts owing to Galway County Council; request for a City Recovery Task
Force; query re: costings for Lenaboy; clarification on works at Dominic Street; payments to
contractors and application process for the outdoor adaptation grant.
Mr. D. Smyth; Mr. D. Mahon and the Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries
raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
That the Executive seek the cessation of the historical annual payment of €1 million to
Galway County Council regarding compensation for the extension of the City boundary.
This was agreed and approved.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
2(b) Annual Financial Statement for year ending 31st December 2020
(i) Approval of Annual Financial Statements (Unaudited) for year ended 31st December 2020
(ii) Approval of Transfers To/From Reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the Accounts
(iii) Approval of Over/Under Expenditure by Division as detailed in Note 16 of the Accounts
Items 2(b)(i)(ii)&(iii) were agreed and approved.
3
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Notes from Procedures Committee Meeting held on Tuesday 30th March 2021
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
3(a) To note minute of Procedures Committee Meeting held on Tuesday 30th March 2021
This was agreed and noted.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator referred to the recent Procedures Committee
meeting and outlined the proposals agreed by the Committee for consideration and approval
by Council.
Cllr. M. O'Connor referred to NOM 21/2020 'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and
Biodiversity Emergency' and Cllr. P. Keane's approved proposal that a Report be prepared for
consideration by full Council on the merits or otherwise of declaring a Climate and Biodiversity
Emergency and including what practical consequences this would have for Galway city and
that this Report be received two weeks in advance of the proposed Special meeting for
discussion at this meeting.
The Chief Executive advised that due to work commitments he will endeavour to prepare a
response to Cllr. Keane's request for a report on the matter during the week.
Councillors discussed the current 1 hour 55 minute duration and meeting arrangements.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed that an extension of time be examined. Cllr. O. Hanley expressed
his support of this proposal and also the facilitation of access to meetings by members of the
public.
The Chief Executive confirmed a cyberattack on Microsoft's networks with impacts on some
government services, including aspects of the local government sector.
Mr. G. McMahon referred to current level 5 restrictions and outlined the proposal of the
Procedures Committee to review meeting arrangements at the end of May.
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
To approve the following schedule of meetings as agreed by the Procedure's Committee and
that current meeting arrangements remain as are and be reviewed at the end of May
Mon 12th April - April Ordinary Meeting
Mon 19th April -
Special Meeting — Notice of Motions
Mon 26th April - Adjourned Ordinary Meeting
May 10th May
- May Ordinary Meeting
May 24th May - May Adjourned Ordinary Meeting
4
Mon 14th June -June Ordinary Meeting
Fri 18th June - Annual Meeting
Mon 28th June - June Adjourned Ordinary Meeting
The schedule of meetings was agreed with a review of arrangements to be completed at the
end of May.
Cllr. l. Byrne requested that NOM 4/2021 be considered by Council under Standing Order 34
as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business.
Councillors discussed the motion.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries
raised and confirmed that there is no sanction from the Department of Local Government or
financial provision for such a post in the 2021 budget but that a Report will be prepared on
such a post which could be considered by Council.
Supported by: Cllrs. A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; D. Lyons; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
NOM 4/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. l. Byrne
Date Received: 31st January 2021 — Amended 18th February 2021
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a
week in the main city parks to ensure that they are safe and of high maintenance for the
benefit of the public and of biodiversity.
Cllr. A. Cheevers also submitted a motion under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the
purpose of dealing with urgent business.
Supported by: Cllrs. I. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins;
E. Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Response issued on 14th April 2021
Mayor Cubbard advised that Cllr. N. McNelis; D. McDonnell; l. Byrne and M.J. Crowe had
indicated their expression to speak.
It was agreed that both motions be considered further at the next Council meeting.
The meeting ended at 16:56 p.m.
5
DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary April Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 26th April, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr.
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
E. Fanning, A/Senior Engineer
Ms.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
S. Connolly, Senior Engineer
Ms.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer
Mr. C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. F. Kearney, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the adjourned meeting with a
statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders
followed by a moment of silent reflection. Mr. McMahon reminded attendees of the agreed
protocol for attendance at meetings which prohibits recording/rebroadcasting of audio or
images.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the reconvened meeting.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that they start the meeting with the continuation of the discussion
on NOM 8/2021 and NOM 10/2021 and follow with items 4(j) Tourism Infrastructure, 4(a)
Government policy paper on Irish Water and 4(h) Arts Strategy. This was seconded by Cllr. C.
Higgins and agreed by all.
6
1. Notices of Motion (continued from Special meeting on 19/04/2021)
NOM 8/2021 Original motion
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 25th February 2021
That Galway City Council recognises that Section 183 of the Local Government Act, is one of
the most important reserved functions delegated to elected members.
- That this Council opposes the provisions in the Land Development Agency 2021 Bill (to be
enacted) which overrides the decision making of elected members regarding the transfer or
sale of public land. That this Bill would further undermine local democracy and the work of our
Council Executive in the proper planning of our county/city and our local communities.
- That this Council will continue to actively engage with the Dept. of Housing to utilise and
implement housing models that will provide social and affordable housing for the people of
Galway and retain the ability to plan for the associated infrastructure of such developments.
- That this Council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government
demanding an immediate halt to the progression of the Land Development Agency Bill 2021,
that the Minister engage in consultation with Local Authorities and that the Council invites the
Minister to meet with Councillors to discuss this further.
NOM 10/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make a formal submission to the Minister for Housing,
Local Government & Heritage outlining our complete opposition to the proposed provisions of
the Land Development Agency Bill 2021.
The proposed removal of the Section 183 reserved function of Elected Members in relation to
the disposal of local authority held land to the LDA as provided for in Part 7 Section 56 of the
bill is unacceptable and an affront to Local Democracy. As advocates for the empowerment of
local government, we can never support or accept any diminution in the reserved functions
and powers of Elected Members.
I also have concerns regarding the potential long-term implications for local authorities in
delivering social and affordable housing on local authority held land due to the extensive remit
of the LDA. I believe that this is a major battle in our ongoing fight to preserve the local
democratic function in the face of ever-increasing centralism.
Councillors discussed the discussion continued on the Notices of Motion from Cllr. Hanley and
Cllr. C. Connolly and topics such as the erosion of the rights of councillors under S.183 of the
Local Government Act 2001, the need for the LDA to assist Galway City Council to develop
lands in Dyke Road and Lisboan and the need to build and deliver affordable and social
housing.
7
Mr. G. McMahon, Meeting Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on motion
08/2021.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
That Galway City Council recognises that Section 183 of the Local Government Act, is one of
the most important reserved functions delegated to elected members.
- That this Council opposes the provisions in the Land Development Agency 2021 Bill (to be
enacted) which overrides the decision making of elected members regarding the transfer or
sale of public land. That this Bill would further undermine local democracy and the work of our
Council Executive in the proper planning of our county/city and our local communities.
- That this Council will continue to actively engage with the Dept. of Housing to utilise and
implement housing models that will provide social and affordable housing for the people of
Galway and retain the ability to plan for the associated infrastructure of such developments.
- That this Council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government
demanding an immediate halt to the progression of the Land Development Agency Bill 2021,
that the Minister engage in consultation with Local Authorities and that the Council invites the
Minister to meet with Councillors to discuss this further.
In favour: Cllr. A Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. C.
Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N.
McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In favour: 5 Against: 13 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
There was no seconder for NOM 10/2021 and the motion was not considered.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(j) Tourism Infrastructure projects being progressed by Galway City Council in 2021
i. The Corrib Blueway
ii. Féilte Ireland Outdoor Dining Enhancement Scheme 2021 — Local Authority
Weatherproofing & Outdoor Dining Infrastructure Scheme
iii. Redevelopment of Leisureland
Mr. B. Barrett introduced the background to the Tourism Infrastructure projects progressed
under the Tourism Strategy which was adopted by Councillors in July 2020. He advised that
the focus was on the survival of tourism in the short term and the development of the
domestic tourist market this year with the development of an outdoor season. The Council
are developing Galway to be a sustainable tourism destination.
Mr. R. Lehmann gave a presentation on the four projects that are currently being progressed
by Galway City Council. Mr. Lehmann outlined that the first stage of the Corrib Blueway is a
feasibility study to identify improvements to increase water based activities and enhance
trails. The redevelopment of the Waterworks facility Terryland as a hub for water sports is
8
being progressed with Féiltelreland with a plan to deliver the facility within two years. He then
outlined the Destination Towns project where funding was secured in 2019 and the digital
interactive wayfinding system which will be placed in old telephone boxes and be delivered
in June 2021.
Mr. Lehmann then reported on the current funding schemes available in regards to Tourism.
The Fåilte Ireland Outdoor dining enhancement scheme which provides funding up to €4,000
for the provision of outdoor dining furniture. The Local Authority Weatherproofing and
Outdoor Dining Infrastructure Scheme 2021 has a budget of €200,000 for each local authority
to upgrade and enhance streets and public spaces. The Urban Animation Capital Investment
Scheme which is for the development of public realm and urban animation projects with
funding available for projects with a minimum spend of €250,000. Galway City Council have a
cross department group and are engaging with the stakeholders. The Re-imagining our
Outdoor Spaces Fund 2021 will support the Council to adapt, equip or improve public spaces
for cultural and events activities. Close engagement with stakeholders has taken place and
they are proposing to purchase mobile stages, stretch tents, festival flooring and improving
facilities in public areas. He concluded with an update on the re-development of Leisureland
and the potential to include Salthill Park in the redevelopment. He requested support from
the Councillors to include this.
Councillors discussed the Tourism update and raised a number of queries including the need
for robust environmental assessments on the Blueway; accessibility at the Waterworks
building; the need to prioritise local artists; need to work collaboratively with fishermen;
progress on parklets and site selections for same; extension of outdoor dining to Foster St;
the opening of public building to use toilet facilities; pedestriansation of streets at night time
to trial now; the need for Garda involvement and collaboration; engaging with Salthill
community re: development of Leisureland; the need for a changing places facility at
Waterworks facility; timescale for outdoor dining; local area plan for Salthill; the need for
tourism development in the East side of the City; the inclusion of wet pubs in the outdoor
dining scheme; consultation with the rowing clubs; look at funding from the North West
Regional Assembly and EU options; plans for supporting businesses and vacant units in the
city centre; educational facility and resources at the Waterworks facility; re-development of
North East of Eyre Square; clarification on planning laws; locations of public realm
enhancements; address litter concerns; use of stages in estates and watersafety campaign.
Mr. B. Barrett and R. Lehmann responded to the queries raised.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed and Cllr. N. McNelis seconded the proposal to support the executive
in exploring the development of Leisureland and Salthil Park as a possible combined
development.
9
Mr. G. McMahon, Meeting Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on the motion.
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To support the executive in exploring the development of Leisureland and Salthil Park as a
possible combined development.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A Cheevers; Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O.
Hanley; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D.
McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M.O'Connor ;Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly
In favour: 16 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was carried.
The Chief Executive advised that the proposed development at the Waterworks will include
a changing places facility.
The Mayor concluded the meeting at 17:00.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Government policy paper in relation to Irish Water
Not Considered
(b) Update re COVID 19 "The Path Ahead" - Covid 19 Resilience and Recovery
Not Considered
(c) Galway City Council Community Department:
i. Galway City COVID-19 Community Response Forum — circulated March 2021
ii. NESC Review of Community Call — circulated March 2021
Not Considered
(d) National Development Plan, Review to Renew — Submission made by Galway City
Council on 28th January 2021
Not Considered
(e) Chief Executive's Report:
i. March 2021
ii. April 2021
Not Considered
(f) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Not Considered.
(g) Galway City Council lands on the Ballymoneen Road adjacent to Cappagh Park
Not Considered
10
(h) Galway City Council Arts Strategy 2021 - 2026 & Arts Action Plan 2021 - 2024
Not Considered — Drafts for consideration and adoption
(i) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund (Call 2) To receive update
(k)
ii.
iii.
iv.
vi.
Transport Updates
Cross-City Link / Dublin Road Bus Corridor - Update on Non-Statutory Consultation
Cycleways at Ballyloughane & along Eglinton Canal - Next Steps — To hear a report
Quarterly Report, January
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
Considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April 2021.
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended
medals to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat
Quinlan recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have
yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to
make this a priority.'
Considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April 2021.
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
Raised under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the March Council adjournment meeting held on 22th March 2021 and agreed
for inclusion on the agenda for Special meeting on 19th April 2021.
11
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
Considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April 2021.
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
tl propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the
City that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday
to encourage people to come into the city.'
Response issued 16th April 2021.
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines
for Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a
local ward will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area
committee, to enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate
at which that portion is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the
LPT variation rate is decided.'
Considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April 2021.
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling
network across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle
network currently happening across the city'.
Response issued on 16th April 2021.
NOM 5/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
In light of the findings of the recently published reports on the future development of the
disused Western Rail Corridor from Athenry to Claremorris, and the commencement of
public consultation on the development of the Athlone to Galway greenway, this Council
supports the development of both greenways, from Athlone to Galway, and Athenry to
Claremorris, on the basis that their development will drive tourism and economic growth
across the West, with Galway City being the ultimate destination for users of both
greenways.
12
Wording amended and considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April
2021.
NOM 6/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
This Council recognises that-
For many people, particularly younger women we know that period poverty, or the
inability to afford period products that meet your needs is an issue. Using period
products for longer periods of time than is recommended or using unsuitable
alternatives can lead to infections and health issues. We recognise that this is both
a health and justice issue.
Period injustice has huge knock on effects for women, girls and trans people who
may feel they have no choice but to miss out on educational activities, work or
recreation due to not having appropriate products.
This Council commends the Scottish Government in making available period
products free of charge in their schools, educational institutions, and public
buildings.
This Council further supports the Period Products (Free Provision) Bill 2021 currently
in the Oireachtas.
Considered at a Special Meeting for Notices of Motion on 23rd April 2021.
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should
be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
13
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services Union)
asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures during the
pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to discuss what
direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not Considered.
N0M 12/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council would review the current policy of not affixing the appropriate
penalty to the vehicle of a motorist in breach of parking regulations at the time of the
offence.
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered.
NOM 14/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 15th March 2021
That Galway City Council decide to undertake the provision of a Community Profile and
Needs Analysis with Action Plan, under auspices of NUIG, for the whole East side of Galway
city; The issues to be considered by Councillors may include the following:
Listing of issues to be addressed
Who/what organisations might be invited to participate and to give input in drawing
up draft terms of reference, in consultation with NUIG. For example, maybe the
organisations already serving these communities, include the following:
Galway City Council
NUIG
GMIT
An Garda Siochana
Galway Diocese
Any other?
Steps necessary to progress:
Decision to undertake same
Set up a Steering Committee
Who to lead
Lead to procure costings etc.
Determine how to pay for same and proceed
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
14
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered.
NOM 16/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 3rd April 2021
That Galway City Council would agree to provide communication boards to be installed in
playgrounds throughout Galway City. These boards allow children who are non-verbal or
have challenges communicating to express themselves, increasing inclusion and
independence.
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
NOM 17/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 6th April 2021
This council supports the calls for the reopening and funding of the tidal pools in Salthill
and recognising them for the opportunity to promote swimming and as a visitor
experience. A report should be commissioned on costings of project.
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 8/2021
Question by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 10th March 2021
Can Galway City Council confirm what policy is in place around fencing off playing pitches
in the city as a number of sports clubs have voiced concerns over damage to pitches. If no
policy is in place, when can this council expect a report back on same?
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
Question 9/2021
Question by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 31st March 2021
How many basketball courts or located within City Council estates, the names of the
estates within the three electoral areas and the amount of basketball courts in each
estate and if they are located close to residential properties?
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
Question 10/2021
Question by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt April 2021
15
Can GCC Executive outline the number of staff currently in each Department as
authorised by GCC Executive, who are prevented from working due to current
Government Level 5 COVID 19 restrictions?
Can GCC provide details as to whether consideration can be given under current
legislation to the transfer of Staff — Excepting all staff or staff with family who have
underlying medical conditions for obvious reasons — to those Departments charged with
delivery of Essential Services?
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
Question 11/2021
Question by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 5th April 2021
What preparations has the Council made to realise the opportunity announced in January
by the Department of Transport for active travel staff in Galway City Council to help
deliver quality cycling and walking facilities in the city?
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
Question 12/2021
Question by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 6th April 2021
Can the City Manager please give a written reply to outline the City Councils position on
outside catering and food trucks casually trading. A number of queries have been
received seeking permission to operate at locations across the city; Silver Strand, Barna
Woods, Cappagh Park, Merlin woods, Gratten Beach, Claddagh Quays, Ballyloughane,
Cathedral car park. This summer we are to encourage more to use our outdoor amenities
and parks. Will a process be put in place to invite licences to those locations?
Response issued on 9th April 2021.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence was not considered.
(a) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(e) Publication from Department of Social Protection, General Register Office - Public Consultation on
the reform of the method by which deaths are notified and registered
(f) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Housing,
Local Government & Heritage
(g) Correspondence dated 5th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Public
Expenditure & Reform — Reply to NOM 30/2020 — Cllr. N. McNelis
(h) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Justice —
Reply to NOM 3/2021 — Cllr. F. Fahy — copy attached.
(i) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Dün Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council
(j) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
16
(k) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Department of Housing, Local Government
& Heritage — Urban Regeneration and Development Fund — Ca112
(l) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Children,
Equality, Disability, Integration & Youth — Reply to NOM 3/2021 — Cllr. F. Fahy
(m) Correspondence dated 15th March 2021 received from Valuation Office — Deferral of Revaluation —
Making of Order under section 21(4) of the Valuation Act
(n) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(o) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for Finance
- Reply to NOM 30/2020 - Cllr. N. McNelis
(p) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Galway County Council
(q) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Louth County Council
(r) Correspondence dated 29th March 2021 received from Mayo County Council
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
9. CONFERENCES
None
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
17
