Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held in the Connacht Hotel and virtually
on zoom platform on Monday 12th of June2023 at 3.00 pm.
Presiding
Present
Cllr. Higgins, Mayer of Che City ot Galvygy
Councillors: A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard,
A. Curran, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murp&y & T. O'Flaherty
Present (virtually) Councillös: C. Connolly, & M. O'Connor
Apologies
Present
Present
(virtually)
Cllrs. l. Byrne & F. Fahy
MS. p.
Mr. p.
Ms. H.
Mr. U.
Ms. E.
fiMs.-A.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Executive - Interim
Greene, Director of Services
Kilroy, Director of Services & Head of Finance
Finn, A/Director of Services
Fanning, A/Director of Services
Rohan, Meetings Administrator
e. Reilly, NAssistant Staff Officer
E. Purcell, Clerical Officer
D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
L. Blake, A/Senior Planner
Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
S. Carroll, Executive Scientist
R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer
É. Purcell, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator, commenced the meeting with a statement of
intent to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by
a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor C. Higgins welcomed all to the meeting. The Mayor extended her sincere
sympathies to Cllr. F. Fahy for the loss of his brother Luke Fahy. She also extended
her sympathies to the family of Dave Daly, our former colleague and friend in Galway
City Council, and Peadar Ö Cülåin, father of our colleague Aoife Ni Chülåin. She
proposed a minute's silence, which was agreed by Council.
Cllr. M. Cubbard also wished to extend his sympathies to the family of Mary Walsh
McPhilbin, R.I.P. A minute of silence was observed by Council.
Mayor C. Higgins congratulated Patricia Philbin on her appointment as Interim Chief
Executive and Elizabeth Fanning on her appointment as A/Director of Services.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell to suspend standing orders, in order to
discuss an email from the Recreation & Amenity Department, regarding pitches in
Galway City.
Mayor C. Higgins informed the Council that the booking system proposal is to be
brought before the Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) in September and will then
proceed to stakeholder engagement.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator advised that under Standing Order no. 34
prior notice of the request to consider a motion to deal with urgent business should
be submitted in writing or in email (with or without signatories) to the Mayor and the
Meetings Administrator no later than 11 am on the date of the Council Meeting.
informed the Council that the suspension of Standing Orders was subject to the
requirement that at least two-thirds of the Councillors present vote in favour and
subject to a minimum of 9 members being present at the time the Motion was
proposed.
Cllr. D. McDonnell explained that a letter was issued from Galway City Council to
various governing bodies of sporting clubs, proposing a new online booking system
for grass pitches in the city. The letter implied this system was to be implemented on
the ISt of July 2023, and Councillors were not informed of this proposal. Furthermore,
it was not brought before the Recreation and Amenity SPC. All clubs in Galway City
have a contract with the Council for many years and Cllr. McDonnell did not
understand why this system needed to change.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services advised of the need for a review by the SPC and
stakeholder engagement and noted that the new system will not affect the existing
club licences. In reference to the email, it was noted that the status quo will remain in
place for 12 months.
Cllr. M. Cubbard noted that the letter reads "as this will impact clubs".
Ms. A. Rohan proceeded to record a Roll Call Vote as follows:
Seconded By: Cllr.il. ubbard
Proposed By: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'To suspend standing orders to consider Galway City's grass pitches booking
system, and a letter issued by Galway City Council concerning same.'
In Favour: Cllrs. A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard, A. Curran,
P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis & T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
In Favour: 11 Against: 5 Abstain: 0 Present: 16
The Motion was carried.
2
The Council proceeded to discuss the issue expressing their disappointment,
disregard for elected members and clubs, insurance issues that may arise from the
proposed new policy, dissatisfaction with the running track booking system, proposal
to include Cappagh Park in the licencing system, reference to a report describing the
system used in Dublin, request for usage data for the City's green spaces and
pitches.
Mayor C. Higgins stated that the Council recognises the wonderful work done by
clubs and the level of volunteerism. She wished to ensure the status quo remained in
place until stakeholder engagement and SPC review are completed.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services acknowledged a mistake in the approach to
communications was made and took responsibility for it, stating he endeavours to
improve communications in the future.
Ms. P. Philbin, Interim Chief Executive, responded to comments, queries and
clarifications.
Cllr. P. Keane submitted a motion for consideration and outlined its significance of
the Galway Cup as one of the most elite soccer tournaments in Europe.
Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer, also clarified the tourism benefits to the city that
the Cup brings.
Ms. A. Rohan recorded a Vote as follows:
Seconded By: Cllr. D.lyons
Proposed By: Cllr. P. Keane
'Further to the recommendation made in the Chief Executive's Monthly Report for
June 2023 at paragraph 7.8 entitled Galway Cup, this Council resolves to make
available an additional €10,000 (ten thousand euro) to the 2023 Galway Cup in
recognition of the value and importance of the event to the local economy
through enhanced tourist spend and in recognition of the continued success of
the event over the last decade or so.'
In Favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The Motion was carried.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested a motion be considered 'That we leave the licencing
system in place and include Salthill Knocknacarra FC, Galway Bay Rugby Club and
Galway Bohemians who use Cappagh Park All Weather as this has worked well for
over 40 years. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Cllr. N. Murphy expressed concem over the same system to be used in Cappagh
Park and requested the CE's comments on this.
Cllr. A. Curran proposed an amendment to the motion to consider Mayor Hoare's
suggestion to carry out an audit of pitch capacity and then put the issue to the SPC.
3
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed, with Cllr. D. McDonnell's agreement, that the motion would
be referred to the SPC for discussion. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Cllr. D. McDonnell agreed to defer a vote on the motion on the basis that it is
considered at SPC in September and is addressed by the full Council before
Christmas.
Mr. P. Greene agreed to take this issue before SPC and advised that he will circulate
letters issued to all Councillors.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 8th May, 2023
Mayor C. Higgins invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising.
Under Matters of Accuracy Cllr. D. Lyons queried the Kingston/Southpark
masterplan, as there was a commitment to delivering a Report on same to Council
for the June Council meeting.
Cllr. A. Cheevers requested a full report on all expenditure costs of meetings
including audio visual hire and refreshments.
Under Matters Arising Cllr. N. Murphy requested that questions asked of the
executive regarding the Flood Relief Scheme be circulated to all Councillors,
including their answers.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to a previous request for a brief outline of ventilation
systems in City Hall and requested more detail on same.
Mayor Hoare requested costings to facilitate livestreaming of meetings online.
Mr. P. Greene and Ms. A. Rohan responded to queries and comments.
Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
roposed By;CIIr. Doons
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 8th May 2023
The minutes were agreed and adopted.
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 22nd May, 2023
Mayor C. Higgins invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising
Under Matters of Accuracy, Cllr. D. Lyons advised that he withdrew the motion
17/2022 he submitted from the Special meeting agenda on 22nd May, 2023 as only
three Notice of Motions are permitted on the agenda per Councillor and he had
requested it be put back on the agenda. The motion related to a request for the
installation of a lighted pedestrian crossing on the Barna Road at the laneway that
4
exits from the Rusheen Woods to the Barna Road. He acknowledged that he
received a response to the motion.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that the verbal reply of the former Chief Executive to NOM
15/2023 he proposed relating to Ballyburke and Clybaun Road Lower social and
affordable housing, be recorded in the minutes. He advised that the former Chief
Executive gave a commitment that Councillors would be advised of the process as if
it was a Part 8 application. However, there will be no public consultation or a formal
Part 8 process.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested that on page 7 of the minutes that the names of the
Councillors be listed on the Roll Call Vote taken. She also referred to the former
Chief Executives comment that there is no confirmation from Govemment in relation
to the funding of development levies income. She asked the Interim Chief Executive
if she will be monitoring this, and if the government has formally indicated they will
make up the shortfall.
Cllr. M. Cubbard advised that in relation to NOM 15/2023 he proposed a Roll Call
Vote but did not have the required support.
Cllr. E. Hoare referred NOM 1/20223 relating to South Park and asked that any
boundary disagreements on the pitch be clarified.
Under Matters Arising Cllr. N. McNelis referred to queries that Councillors put
forward in relation to the Clybaun Road development on pg. 9 including layout,
access, and design. He added that these issues need to be addressed as soon as
possible to progress the project.
Ms. P. Philbin, Mr. P. Greene and Ms. A. Rohan responded to comments and
queries.
Seconded Syk Cllr. D. Lyons
Proposed By: Cllr. N. McNelis
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 22nd May, 2023
The minutes were agreed angg@pted.
The Council took a break at 5pm. The meeting resumed at 5:15pm.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Annual Report 2022
Councillors discussed the Annual Report in detail and raised a number of queries
including: a refusal rates of 1 out of every 10 offers of social housing; the need for
more housing liaison officers and that anti-social behaviour needs to be addressed
and a request for additional water refill stations on the eastside of the city.
Cllr. D. McDonnell raised the point that the Galway City Development Plan does not
comply with national policy at present and a discussion ensued on the matter.
5
Cllr. D. Lyons asked if the Interim Chief Executive could ask the Minister for direction
regarding lands in the city which have no zoning.
Ms. P. Philbin confirmed that she will relay these comments back to the Minister and
the Office of the Planning Regulator.
Ms. E. Fanning, A/Director of Services, Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services, Mr. D.
Mahon, Senior Executive Officer, Ms. H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer and Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Planner responded to comments and queries.
Seconded By: Cllr. E. Hoare
2(a) To note and adopt the Annual Report 2022
The Annual Report was adopted unanimously.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Note of Corporate Policy Group (CPG) meeting 8 held on 11th May, 2023
Cllr. N. McNelis and Cllr. D. Lyons expressed dissatisfaction with only one member
of senior management being present at the previous CPG meeting. The change of
date of the meeting at short notice at the request of CPG members was also noted.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested an up-to-date written report on the Crown Square
project.
The note of the CPG meeting and the approval of the Marketing & Regional Festival
Fund 2023 guidelines and application process was noted by Council.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Amenity Grants 2023
Mayor Hoare referred Councillors to the Amenity 2023. Conflicts of interest were
declared by Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. M. O'Connor, Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. D. McDonnell
regarding their involvement as Chair or members of Residents Associations. This
was noted.
CProp6ééd By:CIIr. D. yons
Seconded By: Cllr. D. McDonnell
4 (a) To note and approve Amenity Grants 2023 per Report circulated 7th June,
2023
This was approved by Council.
Mayor Hoare proposed that Council consider item 7, 9 and 10 as the meeting was
nearing finish time. This was agreed.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
6
Proposed By: Cllr. b. Lyons
Seconded By,TCIIr. D. McDonnell
7. To note correspondence 7(b) to 7(i) inclusive.
This was agceed by CouncJl.
(a) Correspondence from Western Inter-County Railway Committee received
28th June 2022 — To consider nomination of up to four Galway City
Council Elected Members to this Committee - Not Considered
(b) Correspondence received 18th April 2023 from Office of the Planning
Regulator
(c) Correspondence received 20th April 2023 regarding a motion passed at
Wexford County Council Meeting
(d) Correspondence received 25th April 2023 regarding a motion passed at
Westmeath County Council Meeting
(e) Correspondence received 25th April 2023 from Minister Darragh O'Brien
(f) Correspondence received 8th May 2023 from Mayo County Council
(g) Correspondence received 9th May 2023 from Clare County Council
(h) Correspondence (x2) received 16th May 2023 from Kerry County Council
(i) Correspondence received 22nd May 2023 from Office of the Taoiseach
It was agreed by Council to leave correspondence item 7(a) on the agenda for
consideration by Council at a future meeting.
9. CONFERENCES
ProposedBy: Cllr. m Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr. D. McDonnell
9. Approved Conferences and Training
The Council apprgved same.
Approved Training
Title — AILG Module 3 — "Overview of Existing Planning Legislation & Policy
Guidance"
Date - 15th & 17th June 2023
Venue — Mullingar Park Hotel (1 5th) & The Avalon House Hotel, Castlecomer, Co.
Kilkenny (17th)
Conferences
Title — Seån Mac Diarmada Summer School 2023
Date - 9th & 10th June 2023
Venue — Kiltyclogher, Co. Leitrim
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS
Proposed By: Cflr. b. Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr. D. McDonnell
10. To note votes of sympathy and congratulations
7
The Council approved same.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b) Chief Executive's Reports - Not Considered.
a. May 2023 — issued
b. June 2023 -to follow
(c) Local Government Boundary Arrangements for Galway City Council - Not
Considered.
(d) Draft Galway City Council Protocol on Civic Commemorations - Not
Considered.
(e) Crown Square Update - Not Considered.
(f) EPA Focus On Local Authority Environmental Enforcement - Performance
Report 2021 - Not Considered.
(g) National Oversight and Audit commission (NOAC) Galway City Council
Scrutiny Report — copy issued 6th January, 2023 - Not Considered.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION - Not Considered
NOM 812022
Submitted b Cllr. A. Cheevers on the 16th Ma 2022
I am calling on Galway County Council to have full consultation with Galway City
Council public representatives in relation to the Master Plan for the Galway Airport
Site.
I believe that as it is jointly owned with the county council the city council need to
have full consultation in this rocess and it should not be solel for Coun Council.
NOM 18/2021 submitted under SO 34 at Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 7th A ril 2021 Amended wordin 30th Ma 2022
That Galway City Council to permanently pedestrianise cross street and that would
be from the Dåil Bar to Supermacs and to work with businesses to ensure the safety
for pedestrians and cyclists.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda. The Motion was
deferred at a Special meeting held on 30th May 2022 and a Report is to be brought
to Council on the matter.
NOM 01/2023
Motion passed unanimously 16 in favour at Special meeting held on 22nd May, 2023.
Re uest that the Motion remain on the A enda
8
Submitted b Cllr. E. Hoare on the 10th Janua 2023
That Galway City Council review and urgently address the flooding issues that
continue to persist at the playing pitches in South Park. This is a serious health
and safety issue and is impacting on the uses of the playing pitches during periods
of heav rainfall.
6. QUESTIONS - Not Considered
Q3/2023
Submitted b Cllr. N. Mur h on the IStA ril 2023
My question relates to the new "cost rental backstop" whereby the council or an
Approved Housing Body (AHB) will purchase the home of renters who are not in
receipt of HAP or RAS but who are facing homelessness due to the sale of the
property. I realise that initially the AHBs will not be involved, and the council will be
empowered to purchase the property. What extra resources (e.g. manpower and
budgetary) is the council devoting to ensure this and how long will it be until the
council have the infrastructure in lace to start makin urchases?
Q412023
Submitted b Cllr. N. McNelis on the 10th of A ril 2023
Can Galway City Council urgently look at the design of Upr and Lwr Clybaun Road
and Upr and Lwr Ballymoneen roads as pedestrian crossings at this roundabouts
are not safe and the speed coming off these is very high.
Elected members of the West Ward met with Garda Superintendent last week and
also raised this but there needs to be a desi n chan e to make these areas safe.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION - Not Considered
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
None
The meeting concluded at 18:26.
Minutes, Confirmed & Signa
Mayor of Gal zay
9
