Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in Leisureland,
Salthill and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 12th July, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; O. Hanley;
D. Lyons; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor
& T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: l. Byrne; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; E. Hoare
& N. Larkin
P. Keane
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
MS.
Mr.
Ms.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
P. Greene, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
R. McNally, Director of Services
D. Smyth, Head of Finance
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Cormican, Executive Engineer
Mr. D. Greally, Executive Engineer
Ms. N. Farrell, Head of ICT
Ms. S. Gilroy, Clerical Officer
Ms. A. Ni Chülåin, Clerical Officer
Ms. E. Kennedy, ARUP Consultant
Mr. B. Burke, ARUP Consultant
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the
agreed protocol for meetings. He reminded all attendees that no recording of images (still or
moving) or audio is allowed by any participant or observer and the reproduction or re-broadcast of
any aspect of the proceedings anywhere and in any format by any participant is strictly prohibited.
He added that participation in the meeting by observers is not permitted and for media attending
online that their microphone should remain on mute and the use of the chat facility is prohibited.
1
Mayor C. Connolly proposed that the agenda be considered in the order as set out. She referred to
agenda Item 2(a) Consideration of rate of Local Property Tax under Finance (Local Property Tax) Act
2012 (as amended) and proposed that this item be considered at the July Adjournment meeting
scheduled for Monday 19th July 2021, advising that this was a recommendation from the most
recent Corporate Policy Group (CPG) meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
To Consider the local adjustment factor for Local Property Tax at the July Ordinary Adjournment
meeting scheduled for Monday 19th July 2021.
This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th June 2021 and adjournment meeting
held on 28th June 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Matters arising:
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty requested information regarding the servicing of litter bins in the city, and, if there
were separate evening collections.
Cllr. O. Hanley requested a response to his query on vacant sites register.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to queries raised as follows: outdoor dining and where to go to if you have
concerns or how to establish if a premises has a licence; the enforcement of the Barcelona
declaration; request for a report regarding the number of City Council properties that have
management fees and how much is paid annually; concerns regarding outdoor drinking and other
related issues.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to a recent Motion which was proposed by Cllr. M.J. Crowe and passed
by Council 'That this Council proposes the establishment of a new committee whose membership
will be decided by the Corporate Policy Group with the goal of a comprehensive set policy on naming
publicly owned lands and buildings in the city after persons. This committee should aim to have a
report brought to Council no later than the Ordinary meeting in September'. Mayor C. Connolly
advised that it was agreed at the recent CPG meeting that this matter will be considered further at
the next CPG meeting scheduled for 15th October 2021.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised by Councillors. He added that Mr. B.
Barrett, A/Director of Services and Mr. R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer are available for any queries
regarding outdoor dining. Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer also responded to queries raised.
2
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Adoption of the minutes of the ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th June 2021 and
adjournment meeting held on 28th June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
I(b) Special Meetings of Galway City Council, 9th, 16th, 21st & 23rd June & 5th July
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding each of the Special
Meetings separately.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 9th June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding the Special Meeting of
Galway City Council held on 16th June 2021.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 16th June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding the Special Meeting of
Galway City Council held on 21st June 2021.
Cllr. N. Murphy referred to page 4 of the minutes in the second last paragraph and referred to a
reference to parking suggesting that the word 'on-street' be inserted before parking. His comments
were noted, however, it was agreed that the minute would remain as noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 21st June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding the Special Meeting of
Galway City Council held on 23rd June 2021.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty referred to page 6 and a motion where she requested that her name be removed
as seconder. She advised that she had difficulty with the word 'segregation', which was
subsequently removed from the Motion passed. This was noted.
3
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 23rd June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding the Special Meeting of
Galway City Council held on 5th July 2021.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Murphy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 5th July 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Cllr. N. Murphy queried if feedback will be provided to persons that made submissions relating to
the pre-draft City Development Plan consultation. It was advised that each submission is not
specifically responded following this stage of the process. It was noted that there will be a further
public consultation period available to the public.
I(c) Annual Meeting of Galway City Council 18th June 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising regarding the Annual Meeting of
Galway City Council held on 18th June 2021.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Annual Meeting of Galway City Council held on 18th June 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Consideration of rate of Local Property Tax under Finance (Local Property Tax)
Act 2012 (as amended) Deferred to the July Adjournment meeting scheduled for Monday
19th July at 3pm.
2(b) Disposal of Land/Premises by Way of Lease at Carnmore, Co. Galway pursuant
to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, and Section 211 of the Local
Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000
Councillors discussed the Report distributed.
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed the approval of the disposal by way of lease. This was seconded by Cllr. C.
Connolly.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised.
4
The Chief Executive also responded to queries raised and advised Councillors that they have the
power to accept, reject or amend the said proposal. He also confirmed that part of the site will
continue to be guaranteed to the Health Service Executive as a COVID testing centre.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed an addition to the Motion that the Section 183 be agreed in principle
subject to the caveat that it will come back before Council with precise details of all aspects of the
lease arrangements at a future date. This was seconded by Cllr. J. Connolly and agreed by
Councillors.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
2(b) Approval in principle to the disposal of Land/Premises by Way of Lease to Danü Media
Teoranta at Carnmore, Co. Galway pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, and
Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 subject to the
caveat that it will come back before Council with precise details of all aspects of the lease
arrangements at a future date.
This was approved.
2(c) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Fionnuisce Estate (part)
Mayor C. Connolly referred to agenda item 2(c) and Councillors noted the Report that was
distributed.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
2(c) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Fionnuisce Estate (part)
This was approved.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Draft Note of Procedures Committee meeting of Galway City Council on 25th
June 2021
Mayor C. Connolly referred to agenda item 3(a) and proposed that the Council write to
Government seeking funding to allow for webcasting. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe advised that this could be considered in the Council budget for 2022.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3(a) Draft Note of Procedures Committee meeting of Galway City Council on Friday 25th June
2021
This was noted.
5
3(b) Draft Corporate Policy Group Meeting minutes 9th July 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3 (b) Draft Corporate Policy Group Meeting minutes 9th July 2021
This was noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4 (a) Galway BusConnects — Update on Public Consultation received. (This item will
be concluded at the adjournment of the July ordinary meeting with contributions
from remaining Councillors and responses by the executive).
4a(i) Cross City Link and
4a(ii) Dublin Road Bus Corridor
Mayor C. Connolly referred to a number of Councillors that has indicated to speak at the last
meeting. Individual matters raised included: status of application for the proposed Outer Ring
Road, concerns regarding road works in the city centre, details of one way system at College Road,
lack of resources, timeline of An Bord Pleanåla decision making process, details of brochures
delivered to landowners and status of negotiations, effects on Renmore estates and Roscam,
potential loss of green space at Merlin woods and request for an update on segregated cycle lanes,
consultation wish public transport providers, status of proposed bus corridor through University
Hospital Galway, if submissions were available to view by Councillors, discussion on potential site
for cemetery on the Dublin Road and traffic management, need for a bus corridor on the
Quincentennial Bridge and a request for details of further consultation proposed.
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer and Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer,
managers of the two projectsresponded to queries and clarifications from Councillors.
Mr. B. Burke, Consultant ARUP was responding to queries and clarifications raised and the
time was approaching 4.55pm.
Mayor C. Connolly closed the meeting at 4.57pm.
6
DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
held in Leisureland, Salthill and virtually on zoom platform
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
on Monday 19th July, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; P. Keane; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis & M. O'Connor
Councillors: M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; E. Hoare; N. Larkin; D.
Lyons; N. Murphy & T. O'Flaherty
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive;
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Smyth, Head of Finance
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
. F. Kearney, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
P. Greene, Director of Services
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. T.
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Mr. D. Reddington, A/Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. D. Greally, Executive Engineer
Mr. P. Batty, Executive Engineer
Ms. S. Gilroy, Clerical Officer
Ms. A. Ni Chülåin, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator reconvened the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders. He confirmed that the duration
of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the agreed protocol for meetings. He reminded
all attendees that no recording of images (still or moving) or audio is allowed by any participant or
observer and the reproduction or re-broadcast of any aspect of the proceedings anywhere and in
any format by any participant is strictly prohibited He added that participation in the meeting by
observers is not permitted and for media attending online that their microphone should remain on
mute and the use of chat facility is prohibited.
Mayor C. Connolly noted that item 4(a) was concluded at the last meeting with any further queries
to be referred to Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services.
7
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Consideration of rate of Local Property Tax under Finance (Local Property Tax)
Act 2012 (as amended)
Mayor C. Connolly proposed to accept the recommendation of the Chief Executive to not alter
the rate for the local property tax (LPT) for 2022. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Councillors considered and discussed same and individual matters raised included the staffing
levels in the local authority, the spending of the tax in local areas, the number of new houses
to be included for taxation, a request for a report on how the LPT is being spent in each
electoral area, the consideration of increasing the tax to increase income, the welcoming of
a new bill and the tax being paid on the value of a property as not being acceptable.
The Chief Executive, B. McGrath responded to the queries raised by the Councillors.
Cllr. P. Keane proposed that Galway City Council increase the local property tax by the
necessary percentage that would increase income by €600,000 to allow for €200,000 for
projects in each of the three electoral area. There was no seconder of this motion.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed to accept the recommendation of the Chief Executive to not alter
the rate for the local property tax for 2022. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons. A roll-call
vote was taken.
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
To accept the recommendation of the Chief Executive to not change the rate for the local
property tax for 2022
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. N. Larkin,
Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. P. Keane & Cllr. N. Murphy
In Favour: 16 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 18
The motion was passed.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Galway City Council write to Central Government to propose that
Housing funds heretofore coming from Government Central Funds should not be taken out
of the LPT due to Galway City Council. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
After a discussion the proposal was amended to:
That Galway City Council write to Central Government to propose that Housing funds
heretofore coming from Government Central Funds should not be taken out of the LPT due
to Galway City Council but should come from Government Funds.
8
A roll-call vote was taken.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
That Galway City Council write to Central Government to propose that Housing funds
heretofore coming from Government Central Funds should not be taken out of the LPT
due to Galway City Council but should come from Government Funds
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D.
McDonnell & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr.
O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy,
Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 6 Against: 12 Abstain: O Present: 18
The motion was defeated.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4 (a) Galway BusConnects — Update on Public Consultation received. To conclude
with contributions from remaining Councillors.
(i) Cross City Link and
(ii) Dublin Road Bus Corridor
4(b) Cycle Network Projects Update.
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer, provided an update on the various cycle network projects
across the city.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed "That Galway City Council shall urgently seek to create a two way
segregated cycle track on a temporary basis along the coastal side of Salthill promenade,
specifically the R336 from the junction with Grattan Road up to where the R336 meets with
the R337, and shall immediately apply for COVID-19 funding or any available alternative
source of funding to facilitate this". This was seconded by Cllr. N. Murphy
Matters raised included if other projects like Millar's Lane are proposed, if projects planned
for Dangan/Bushy Park/n59, schools proposed for the schools street trial, cargo bike parking
at cycling parking locations, dished footpaths at Southpark, parking survey results, the need
to consult with residents associations, survey of cyclists using infrastructure, clarity on what
is allowable under public consultation, an update on the Clifden Railway Bridge project, issues
with the railings on the Eglington Canal, the consideration of a two-way cycle lane and the
proposed CPO of lands at Béthar Stiofån, any planned proposals for Headford Rd and Dyke Rd
towards Menlo.
The Mayor indicated that the agenda item will be continued at the Ordinary meeting in
September, continuing with contributions from those remaining counciilors that had
indicated to speak.
9
4(c) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Not considered.
4(d) Decarbonising Zones - Report circulated May 2021 - To Hear a Presentation
Mayor C. Connolly proposed that item 4(d) Decarbonising Zones be noted. This was seconded by
N. McNelis. All agreed and the item was noted.
Seconded by: Cllr. N.McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
To note the Decarbonising Zones report.
This was noted.
4(e) Galway County Council draft County Development Plan RSES(MASP) - Draft Vision
Statement for former Galway Airport Site at Carnmore
4(f) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund (Call 2)
Mayor C. Connolly proposed that item 4(f) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund be noted.
This was seconded by N.McNelis. All agreed and the item was noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. N.McNelis
To note the update on the Urban Regeneration & Development Fund.
This was noted.
4(g)Galway City Council lands adjacent to Cappagh Park
Not Considered.
4(h) Galway City Council Digital Strategy
Not Considered.
4(i) Chief Executive's Report:
i. June 2021
ii. July 2021
Not Considered.
4(j)
ii.
iii.
iv.
vi.
Quarterly Report, April — June 2021- Not Considered.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
10
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should
be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services Union)
asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures during the
pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to discuss what
direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not Considered.
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered.
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered.
11
Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Supported by: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and
Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water
Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works
together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently
being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered.
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its
own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered.
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not Considered.
12
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and
in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission
from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal
quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021- Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
• Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily
off the road due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of
their condition.
• Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not Considered.
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic
Act 2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-
keeping with a cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall
be presented as standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
Not Considered.
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the
use of automated signage.
Not Considered.
13
NOM 33/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 22nd June 2021
Galway City Council acknowledges the need for a new national maternity hospital (NMH)
to provide the highest quality healthcare in Dublin, and across Ireland.
Galway City Council notes the lack of legal clarity regarding the ownership and management
of the hospital, and also acknowledges the concerns regarding the employment rights of
those who will work in the hospital.
Not Considered.
Galway City Council agrees to write to the Minister for Health to call for the proposed new
publicly-funded NMH to be constructed on land owned by the State; and that, to guarantee
its secular ethos, the new facility be fully owned and governed by the State. If this motion
is passed it is agreed that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
NOM 34/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 3rd July 2021
Galway City Council would develop a re-surfacing scheme for the Salthill Promenade.
Not Considered.
NOM 35/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 5th July 2021
That this Council again calls on the NTA to provide a bus route for Upr. Ballymoneen Road
and engage with operators to deliver same. With two new developments built by City
Council and a third to seek planning and also a new school, it is important that public
transport be made available for residents. It is not appropriate to expect residents to walk
to Western Distributor Road as this does not promote use of public transport.
A copy of this motion to be sent to Minister for Transport.
Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 14/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
To ask for an update on Galway City Council's Vacant Site Register; was the €322,000 due
in January from the 6 sites on the register, per the latest update to the Planning SPC,
collected to support the provision of housing and regeneration of land by the Council, has
a review of the next sites progressed and if so what is the number of individual sites
identified at this stage, and will the Council update Councillors should additional sites be
added to the Register?
Not Considered.
14
Question 16/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd June 2021
What works are required to enable Galway City Council to remove the Perspex sheeting
surrounding the Browne Doorway and ensure the safe continued display of the doorway at
its current location in Eyre Square? Can costings be provided for the required work?
Not Considered.
Question 17/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th June 2021
Could you please assist with a written reply to this question on the Galway Connemara and
Barna Greenways.
1. What appene to Atkins plan from 2016? Why has it not been progressed?
2. Eglint&n Canal update. Can this be expedited
3. What re thecouncil's envisaged routeoptions for the Silver Strand to City centre
walkin / cycling track?
4. Is the County councifd6ih@Qhe séCfi6H'ffoiiå Iverstrand onwards i,e. is the project
being split?
5. Why will recruitment of Active travel staff take so long?
Not Considered.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Correspondence dated 8th June 2021 received from Monaghan County Council — copy
attached.
(b) Correspondence dated 11th June 2021 received from Joe O'Neill, Chair, Western Region
Drug & Alcohol Task Force — copy attached.
(c) Correspondence dated 14th June 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
— copy attached.
(d) Correspondence dated 25th June 2021 received from Waterford City & County Council —
copy attached.
(e) Correspondence dated 25th June 2021 received from Clare County Council — copy attached.
(f) Correspondence dated 28th June 2021 received from Kerry County Council — copy attached.
(g) Correspondence dated 28th June 2021 received from Clare County Council
— copy
attached.
(h) Correspondence dated 29th June 2021 received from Sligo County Council — copy attached.
(i) Correspondence (Circular LG 02/2021) dated 30th June 2021 received from Department of
Housing, Local Government & Heritage — copy attached.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
9. CONFERENCES
None
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
15
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 4.55 pm.
Minutes, C firmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
16