Presiding:
Present:
Apologies
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 12th October, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Deputy Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis,
N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: M. Cubbard; C. Higgins & P. Keane.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
. E. Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms
J. Higgins, Staff Officer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
MS.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting
consideration.
and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty requested that Agenda Item 10 be considered and this was agreed.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty proposed the approval of Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations. This
was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and was agreed by Councillors.
Vote of Sympathy
Cllr. O' Flaherty expressed her condolences to Cllr. C. Connolly and her family on the passing of
her Aunt Mary Carpenter, RIP.
Vote of Congratulations
St. Michael's GAA Club
Min s, Con d & Signa
Mayor o Galway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th September & Adjournments of meetings
held on 21st & 28th September 2020
Matters of Accuracy
Cllr. N. Murphy and Cllr. J. Connolly referred to the item regarding a funding request from
Galway Salthill Fåilte on page 11 in the draft minutes of the adjournment meeting held on 21st
September 2020. The proposal made by Cllr. J. Connolly was 'To approve Option 1 with the
provision of an additional €207,337 rather than €178,166.53 sought so as to enable the Pool
and Gym operations of the facility to remain open until the end of the year'. The draft minutes
cited Option 2, in error. This matter of accuracy was agreed by Councillors.
The Meetings Administrator advised that the minutes will reflect this correct record.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 14th
September 2020 & Adjournments of meeting held on 21st & 28th September 2020.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
I(b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 5th October 2020
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty referred to a Motion she raised at the end of the Special meeting on the 5th
October regarding the collection of grass cuttings from estates in the city. This motion was
seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons. Cllr. O'Flaherty noted that a written response was received
regarding the motion raised.
A discussion was held regarding the response received by Cllr. O'Flaherty and whether the
motion be considered for a vote. The Meetings Administrator referred to Standing Orders and
clarified the matter.
The Chief Executive confirmed that bags of green waste left in the green areas of a number
of estates in the city before this service ceased will be collected. He referred to the All-Ireland
Pollinator Plan, which the Council has adopted, and he requested that the issue of grass
cutting, collection and mulching in public areas in the context of the Pollinator Plan be
referred to the Strategic Policy Committee for consideration.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
I(b) - Draft Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on
onday October 2020.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Request to Council for Overdraft Accommodation 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
To approve the request to Council for Overdraft Accommodation 2021 in the amount of €5
million, as per report issued on 7th October 2020.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Deputy Mayor Connolly advised that Cllr. D. McDonnell requested the deferral of Item 2(b)(i)
due to other Councillor business. This was agreed.
2(b) Variations to the Galway City Development Plan (GCDP) 2017-2023
b(ii) Proposed Variation No. 6 to insert a Specific Development Objective on RA zoned lands
at Cappagh Park to allow for consideration of an Aquatic Sports and Fitness Centre.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed that the Planner's Report be taken as read. Cllr. C. Connolly
proposed an amendment to this proposal that an overview be received from Ms. H. Coleman,
Senior Executive Planner. In line with Standing Orders the amendment is considered first:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
'That the Council hear from the Senior Executive Planner in relation to the proposed variation
to the City Development Plan'
In Favour: 6 Against: 7 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
The Motion was defeated.
As the amendment was defeated, Deputy Mayor Connolly read the original motion for a vote
as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'l propose that we accept the Planner's Report as being read'
In Favour: 7 Against: 6 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Councillors discussed the proposed variation and matters raised included: concerns regarding
traffic; land purchased at Cappagh Road and the need for extra car parking; impact on the
3
environment; feasibility study conclusions; Leisureland; demographic usage of facility;
clarification regarding previous objectives in previous Development Plans; public transport;
Eastside requirement for facilities and population projections.
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner and the Chief Executive responded to queries and
clarifications raised. It was confirmed that all aspects of the proposed development will be
thoroughly assessed at planning application stage and that should the planning application
process be under the Part 8 Regulations it will come before Council as a reserved function.
Detailed costings and funding requirements will also be a separate consideration for the
Members.
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To approve the Conclusion and Recommendation of the Chief Executive on the Proposed
Variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023. In accordance with Section 13 of the
Planning and Development Act as amended. PV6: To insert a Specific Development Objective on
RA zoned lands at Cappagh Park to allow for consideration of an Aquatic Sports and Fitness
Centre'
4.3 Conclusion and Recommendation of the Chief Executive
The proposed variation arising from the award of LSSIF funding to progress the development of
an Aquatic Sports facility at Cappagh Park and the consideration of the Feasibility Study Report
for Galway Regional Aquatic & Fitness Centre for Galway City Council by the Elected Members
at the Council meeting of 22nd June 2020.
Having regard to the proper planning and sustainable development of the area and the
submissions received in relation to this Proposed Variation, the recommendation of the Chief
Executive to the Elected Members is to make the Variation of the Galway City Development Plan
2017-2023.
In Favour: 13 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 15
The Variation was passed.
b(i) Proposed Variation No. 5 to align the Development Plan with the National Planning
Framework (NPF), Regional Spatial Economic Strategy (RSES) and Galway Metropolitan
Area Strategic Plan (MASP) and to incorporate the Galway City Council Climate Adaptation
Strategy.
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner gave a comprehensive presentation to Councillors
on the proposed variation no. 5. She outlined the variation process; public consultation; the
requirement to vary the plan to align with the National Planning Framework (NPF); the
Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy (RSES) and the Galway Metropolitan Area Strategic
Plan (MASP) and to incorporate the Galway City Council Climate Adaptation Strategy. She
confirmed that the City Development Plan Review will commence in January 2021.
4
Ms. Coleman outlined the Chief Executive's response and recommendations to
submissions/observations received. She summarised issues raised and advised the Chief
Executive's recommendation to make the Variation to the Galway City Development Plan
2017-2023.
Councillors discussed the proposed variation and matters raised included: population
projections; clarity on heights study and if it will affect planning permissions from Sept 2021;
submissions from the Planning Regulator and NWRA; inclusion of additional Regional Policy
Objectives; provision of secondary school in Ardaun; process of appeal regarding any
contradictions; NPF targets; requirement for infrastructure in advance of planning
permissions granted; housing land bank; parking guidelines; public transport; housing need
demand assessment; consultation with the Department of Education; MASP and
improvement of Greenway connections and the requirement to adopt Government policy
which affects consultation.
Ms. H. Coleman and Ms. C. Phelan responded to queries and clarifications raised by
Councillors. It was confirmed that the variation and development plan will be consistent with
the RSES. The variation embodies the main principles of the RSES and the imminent review
of the development plan will allow for a more comprehensive assessment. A number of minor
amendments arising from submissions made were set out.
Deputy Mayor C. Connolly proposed the further consideration of the proposed variation
under Agenda item 2(b)(i) for consideration at the adjournment meeting scheduled for
Monday 19th October 2020. This was agreed.
The Meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
5
DRAFT Minutes of the Adjournment Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies
In Attendance:
held on Monday 19th October, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Hanley, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: F. Fahy, C. Higgins & M. O'Connor
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
J. Higgins, Staff Officer
Ms.
. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Ms
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer
Mr. M. Mannion, Assistant Engineer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator opened the meeting. He advised that it was
proposed to use online technology for presentations at the meeting and referred Councillors
to consider the suspension of Standing Order no. 22 regarding audio/visual recordings.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested that Councillors that could not make meetings be facilitated via
online technology due to the fact that they may have to cocoon or restrict their movements
during the Coronavirus pandemic. Cllr. D. Lyons suggested the use of online technology to
hold meetings to consider items on the agenda that did not require a decision by Council.
The Meetings Administrator and the Chief Executive advised that under current legislation
Council meetings and decisions at Council meetings must be taken at a physical space and
confirmed that a Ministerial Order from Minister O'Brien is imminent to address this matter.
Mayor Cubbard requested that this matter be considered at the next Procedures Committee
meeting. This was agreed by Council.
6
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(b) Variations to the Galway City Development Plan (GCDP) 2017-2023
(i) Proposed Variation No. 5 to align the Development Plan with the National Planning
Framework (NPF), Regional Spatial Economic Strategy (RSES) and Galway Metropolitan
Area Strategic Plan (MASP) and to incorporate the Galway City Council Climate Adaptation
Strategy.
Councillors continued discussion on the proposed variation no. 5 and matters of clarification
were raised including parking in the city centre with reference to the Development Plan and
the NPF; the RSES principles, Regional Policy Objectives (RPOs) and the status of a Height
Report which must be completed by the City Council.
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner and the Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications
raised. The CE confirmed that the inclusion of 60 additional Regional Policy Objectives was
not deemed appropriate. It was stated that many are specifically Regional Assembly
objectives which do not readily transfer to a local level plan; many relate to the wider region
and are objectives which are outside the gift of the City Council to implement. The CE
confirmed that the variation as set out and the development plan will be consistent with the
RSES.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To approve the proposed Variation No. 5 to align the Development Plan with the National
Planning Framework (NPF), Regional Spatial Economic Strategy (RSES) and Galway Metropolitan
Area Strategic Plan (MASP) subject to minor amendments and to incorporate the Galway City
Council Climate Adaptation Strategy - as per Report issued on 7th October 2020
In Favour: 13 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 14
The Variation was approved subject to minor amendments as recommended in the CE Report.
2(c) Section 9 of the Road Traffic Act, 2004, Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) Bye-Laws No.
1 — 2020 , Consideration of Report and Bye-laws for adoption
Mayor Cubbard referred to the Report on Agenda Item 2(c) received on Friday 16th October
and queried if Council wished to defer the matter in order to consider the Report.
It was confirmed that if the agenda item is deferred to the November Ordinary meeting (or a
subsequent meeting) that there are no issues with timeframes in relation to speed limits
which prevent the Council from considering the adoption of the Draft Bye Laws at a future
meeting, including the November Ordinary meeting of the City Council.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
To defer Agenda Item 2(c) to the November Ordinary meeting
In Favour: 8 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 14
7
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. A. Cheevers requested the Mayor to consider an urgent Notice of Motion submitted
under Standing Order. No. 34.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to read the motion.
Cllr. A. Cheevers spoke on the motion and raised issues of health and safety with the current
damaged fence. Councillors discussed the matter raising other issues such as budgets and the
consideration of external sponsorship.
The Chief Executive advised that works to the pitch in question are not in the current adopted
Budget or the Annual Service Plan. However repairs to the existing fence can be undertaken.
He requested Councillors to refer the policy issues relating to fences and related issues within
Parks settings to the Strategic Policy Committee. He requested that the Council consider
deferring the proposed motion to the next SPC meeting. He reminded Councillors that any
relevant declaration of interest should be made, if appropriate.
Following a request from Cllr. N. McNelis, the Chief Executive advised that he will arrange for
a senior member of the Executive to meet the East United Club on this matter.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that the advice of the Chief Executive be taken and the matter be
referred to the SPC. She requested the withdrawal of her name from the written motion
following the clarification received from the Chief Executive.
Cllr. A. Cheevers requested that the motion be taken and Mayor Cubbard proceeded to take
a vote as follows:
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Proposed by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Supported by: Cllrs. T. O' Flaherty; I. Byrne; M.J. Crowe; N. McNelis, M. O' Connor; P. Keane; J.
Connolly; N. Murphy; D. Lyons; D. McDonnell & M. Cubbard.
tl am calling on Galway City Council for permission to erect a steel fence around the pitch in
Castlepark. This is to protect the pitch from ongoing issues with horses and anti-social behaviour.
Ballybane Sports and Community Development are prepared to fundraise towards the cost of
the fence'.
In Favour: 11 Against: 2 Abstain: O
Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe referred to a motion that he submitted at the September Council meeting
under Standing Order No. 34 for the purpose of dealing with urgent business, to which a
response was received from the Transportation Department. Cllr. Crowe requested that the
motion below remain on the November Council meeting Agenda.
8
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That Galway City Council immediately move to implement the assurances given to the Collins
Family before, during and after the 'Kirwan Roundabout Part VIII Process'. These assurances
were given both publicly and privately. Despite this the family have largely been ignored and
this needs to be urgently addressed.'
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Chief Executive's Report:
i. October 2020
Mayor Cubbard sought agreement from Councillors to take the Chief Executive's Report for
October as read. This was agreed.
Councillors discussed the Chief Executive's Report for October 2020. Matters discussed
included: decisions regarding the Christmas market; Christmas in Galway; changes in dates
for cycle lanes to Q4, 2021 and that any movement in dates should be noted by Council;
timeline for cycle stages network; bus routes; Sliabh Bån remedial scheme; budget meeting;
housing units under Part V legislation; Park & Ride; request for speed limit byelaws submission
to be made available online; 30km/h zones at schools; request for the cost of recent Dyke
road works; request for a pedestrian crossing at Hidden Valley; Salmon Weir right turn at the
Town Hall theatre; aggregate surface at Barna woods and disability access; deferral of
Comedy festival; rates payments and request for update on the July stimulus works and
derelict sites; need for estate management resources; request for a report on Ballyloughane
beach sampling for the last four years; IBAL and An Taisce Green Flag results; Cappagh Park
lights update; Ard Cré development date for completion; Glen Oaks winter response and
occupancy to date; request to examine junction at Glen Oaks two yellow boxes; illegal
dumping; financial report and status of Local Improvement Scheme discretionary spending
and the recent successful Mayoral Reception held to honour the Oliver family.
The Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications raised in detail. He proposed to
Councillors that the Budget meeting be deferred from Monday 16th November to a date to be
decided advising that Monday 30th November is the preferred date and is also the last day to
hold the meeting in line with regulation. This deferral request is due to uncertainty owing to
COVID-19 and to ensure that the Council has the required information to adopt a balanced
budget.
4(b) School Streets Pilot for Scoil lognéid, Raleigh Row, Galway — Presentation
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer, Transport, gave a comprehensive presentation to
Councillors. Ms. Finn gave an introduction to the background to create Galway's first school
streets pilot at Scoil lognåid. Ms. Finn gave the rationale as to why the project was proposed;
site visits in 2019/2020; pilot details; infrastructure phase 1 (2020); draft scheme drawings
9
available as part of public consultation; stakeholder meetings; infrastructure phase 2 (2021);
other infrastructure and the next steps.
Councillors discussed the pilot project and complimented Ms. Finn and the team on their
work.
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed the progression of the consultation process. Mayor Cubbard
proceeded to take a vote as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Seconded by: Cllr. P. Keane
Propose to progress the consultation process of the School Streets Pilot for Scoil lognåid,
Raleigh Row, Galway
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 14
The Motion was passed unanimously.
4(c) Traffic Management Proposal for Middle Street, St Augustine Street, Cross Street, and
Abbeygate Street Lower
Cllr. E. Hoare proposed the acceptance of traffic management proposals as outlined in Report
on agenda Item 4(c). This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell. The Mayor proposed that the
Report be taken as read and this was agreed.
Councillors discussed the proposals and Mr. M. Mannion, Assistant Engineer responded to
queries raised.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to take a vote on the matter.
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare
To accept Traffic Management Proposals for Middle Street, St Augustine Street, Cross Street,
and Abbeygate Street Lower
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was passed unanimously.
(a) To receive on update on Galway BusConnects Projects
Cross City Link — Non-Statutory Consultation
ii. Dublin Road Public Transport Corridor — Emerging Preferred Route Options - Non-
Statutory Consultation
Not Considered
(b) To consider correspondence dated 6th October 2020 received from Department of
Transport relating to Galway Harbour. Not Considered.
10
(c) Quarterly Report, July to September 2020 - Not Considered.
. Transport & Infrastructure
ii.
Housing — Copy attached
iii.
Environment & Climate Change
iv.
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
v.
vi.
Community & Sports Development
NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
NOM 19/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 24th September 2020
'That GCC call on the Government to extend the Rates Waiver for an additional six
months.'
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended
medals to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat
Quinlan recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have
yet to be awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to
make this a priority.'
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
11
NOM 22/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That an urgent safety assessment be carried out on Dominick Street and remedial works
be carried out to mitigate danger to the significantly increased number of residents,
particularly families with young children.'
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the
City that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday
to encourage people to come into the city.'
6. QUESTIONS
Question 3/2020
Question given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 7th September 2020
Can a report issue to Councillors regarding the following: (1) Number of hours worked in
overtime by Outdoor Council Staff in Environment charged with litter collection for the year
2019/Jan-present 2020? (2) What is the cost of overtime worked for those periods? (3)
What is the difference and cost of scheduled timetable hours for staff for those periods
versus overtime? (4) What is the explanation for overtime approved? (5) Following my
motion to Council to provide a costing of dealing with illegal dumping in the City - has this
been done? How is the costing carried out and analysed and can you include those details
in the report?
Initial Reply issued with Agenda 9th September 2020
Agenda Item 7. Correspondence and & 9 Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. D.
Lyons. As the meeting ended, the matter was deferred to the November Ordinary Meeting.
12
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Deferred
a) Correspondence dated 14th September 2020 received from Sligo County Council
b) Correspondence dated 16th September 2020 received from Meath County Council
c) Correspondence dated 17th September 2020 received from Department of Housing, Planning & Local
Government
d) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Department of Housing, Planning & Local
Government, Statement of Strategy 2021-2025
e) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Department of Housing, Planning & Local
Government (adjustment to members' representational payment from 1 October 2020)
f) Correspondence dated 24th September 2020 received from Kerry County Council
g) Correspondence dated 29th September 2020 received from Louth County Council
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
9. CONFERENCES
Deferred to the November Council meeting
Title: Celtic Conferences —A Practical Guide to Budget 2021
Venue: O'Donovans Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 6th — 8th November 2020
Title: Celtic Conferences — Health & Safety in the Workplace
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 13th - 15th November 2020
Training Educational Programme
Title: Advanced Diploma in Social Media & Media Law
Year: 2019 - 2020
Venue: King's Inns
Participant: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The Meeting concluded at 16.55 p.m.
13
