Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 12th November, 2018 at 4200 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council;
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. Connolly, P. Conneely, MJ. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard,
F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, P. Flannery,
T. O' Flaherty, C. Ö' Conchüir and J. Walsh.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
. T. Connell, Director of Services
G. McMahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services
Ms
D. Mahon, A/ Director of Services
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance
Ms.
E. Verling, Museum Director
Ms.
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Mr.
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms. G.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor McNelis proposed the Council rise for ten minutes to allow Councillors a break following an
informal briefing that was held in advance of the Ordinary Council meeting. The Mayor further
proposed that the meeting conclude at 20.45 p.m. with a break at 18.30p.m. He also advised that
he would have to leave the meeting for 30 minutes to attend an event. This proposal was seconded
by Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 22nd October 2018
Matters of Accuracy
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty advised that on page 1, she had proposed the Vote of Sympathy for Emma Mhic
Mhathüna; Cllr. B. Cameron advised that on page 2, he seconded the motion to recognise Rahoon-
Newcastle GAA Club under the auspices of the Sports Partnership; Cllr. D. Lyons requested that Item
3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 6th September 2018 be put on the December
Ordinary Council Meeting Agenda as only Agenda Item Conferences/Seminars/Approved Training in
these Minutes were approved.
1
Matters of Accuracy were proposed by Cllr. N. McNelis, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
Item 1 (a) Minutes of Galway City Council Ordinary Meeting held on Monday 22nd October 2018
were adopted.
It was noted that Councillors should submit any queries in relation to the October Ordinary
Meeting Minutes in writing to the Meetings Administrator.
Mayor McNelis then proceeded to put forward three Notices of Motions, as agreed, that were
submitted at the October Ordinary Meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. M. Crowe
"Standing4Women - That this Council noting the recent Cervical Check Scandal, calls upon the
Minister for Health and An Taoiseach to acknowledge, support and respond in detail to the demands
of the Standing4Women campaign. These include: Legislation and policy on mandatory open
disclosure independent of the patient safety bill, provision of a start and end date and full disclosure
on the 1800 smears yet to be audited, and a breakdown of the new packages being negotiated with
laboratories carrying out smear slide analysis including mandatory site audits.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: 1 Present: 15
The Motion was passed
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Cubbard
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell call on Galway City Council to carry out an audit on all mature trees
in Galway city and suburbs to assess their safety and the risk of falling and causing serious damage
to property and people"
Councillors discussed safety concerns regarding trees in the City. The Chief Executive confirmed that
a safety audit was underway by the City Council.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: 0 Present: 15
NOM 2/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 5th February, 2018. Amended 22nd October, 2018
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan Seconded: Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming increasingly
unaffordable and calls on government to: Immediately introduce ambitious affordable rental and
purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where appropriate, Approved Housing
Bodies and Housing Co-operatives; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable housing
schemes".
2
Following discussion, Councillors voted on the Motion as follows:
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: 2 Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Mayor N. McNelis proposed to consider two Motions submitted by Councillor D. McDonnell NOM
15/18 & 17/18 to be considered at 7.30 p.m. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) S183 Local Government Act 2001- Disposal of Freehold of Lands to rear of Clare House, 2-3
Middle St
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services referred Councillors to the Notice circulated on 26th October 2018.
Councillors raised a number of queries with regards to the recommendation to dispose said lands, to
which Mr. Connell responded. Following this a Vote was called as follows:
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"S183 Local Government Act 2001- Disposal of Freehold of Lands to rear of Clare House, 2-3
Middle St" — per Report circulated on 26th October 2018.
In Favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of Monday 22nd October 2018
(b) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of Thursday 8th November 2018
Mayor McNelis proposed the noting of Item 3(a) & 3(b). This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and
agreed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) River Basin Management Plan for Ireland Presentation
Presentation deferred to December Ordinary Meeting
(b) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th September 2018 - Reports issued October 2018
Items 4b (i) to (v) were deferred to the Special Meeting scheduled for Monday 26th November 2018.
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
3
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development
(c) Galway City Museum Cultural Tourism District Project - Update on Stage 2 Application Process
and Revised Funding Considerations
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave an update on the Stage 2 application process and revised
budgetary position as outlined in the Report distributed to Councillors. Mr. McGrath outlined the
background of approval granted by Councillors at the Ordinary Council meeting held on 10th
September 2018 under Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for
development associated with the extension and enhancement of the Galway City Museum as part of
the Cultural Tourism District Project.
At the same meeting, a funding proposal was presented to the members which outlined an estimated
total cost of €8,378,000 to deliver the project and it was agreed an application be made to Fåilte
Ireland for €6m, with approval in principle that Galway City Council would provide the balance of
funding, i.e. €2,378,000. On October 1st, a letter was received from Fåilte Ireland advising it is not
envisaged that grant amounts in excess of €5m will be approved. As a potential €5m grant from Féilte
Ireland would have left a balance of €3,378,000 for Galway City Council to fund, the Council worked
closely with the Design Team to simplify works and reduce cost estimates generating a cost saving of
€396,000.
Mr. McGrath restated the core objectives and the key outcomes associated with the project. Mr.
McGrath recommended that approval-in-principle be given to the provision of match funding in the
amount of €2,982,000, subject to the receipt of grant approval from Féilte Ireland for an amount not
less than €5m, and that a revised funding proposal be submitted to Fåilte Ireland to reflect same.
Cllr. B. Cameron proposed the recommendation of the Chief Executive. This was seconded by Cllr. C.
Ö' Conchüir. Following discussion, Cllr. M. Crowe proposed that match funding in the amount of
€3,378,000 be approved to fund initial proposed works. Councillors expressed their opinions and
support for the delivery of this landmark project which will generate cultural, social and economic
value to the City and the legacy objectives of the Galway 2020 European Capital of Culture project.
In agreement, Cllr. Cameron withdrew his initial proposal.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"Recommend the approval-in-principle be given to the provision of match funding in the amount
of €3,378,000, subject to the receipt of grant approval from Féilte Ireland for an amount not less
than €5m, and that a revised funding proposal be submitted to Féilte Ireland for an amount not
less than €5m, and that a revised funding proposal be submitted to Féilte Ireland to reflect same".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. D. Lyons took Chair of the Meeting at 17.00 p.m.
4
(d) Reports on Loans outstanding on Housing Lands
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services presented a Report on loans outstanding on housing lands with
appendices showing details of the value of loans and annual charges and a location map of each of
the four sites. He confirmed that the value of outstanding loans is €32,152,745 and that all loans are
with the Housing Agency and the raising of each loan was approved by Elected Members.
Councillors discussed the serviced sites submission and the four housing sites in detail, affordability
of housing and the delay in the Affordable Housing Scheme was queried. There were requests for
more details on funding submissions. Cllr. T. O' Flaherty requested a mix of affordable housing to be
considered on housing sites, in particular, the Monivea Road. Mr. Mahon confirmed that funding for
the Monivea Road site was secured under the Social Housing Investment Programme and could only
be used for social housing purposes.
Mr. B. McGrath advised the Meeting that a Report on the full overview of all housing sites will be
available for a future Ordinary Council Meeting.
At 17.50 p.m. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the Council rise for a 15 minute break. The Meeting
resumed at 18.10 p.m with the Mayor presiding.
(e) Chief Executive's Report - November 2018
Councillors discussed the Chief Executive's Report in detail including the Galway City Ring Road
Update; procedures regarding parking fines and relocation of taxi ranks; update requested on NOM
to Minister regarding Producer Responsibility Initiative on disposal of paint; Rahoon Cemetery
Extension; Cappagh Park All Weather Pitch; Christmas Market 2018; Galway 2020; HAP Homeless
Placefinder; Turnkey acquisitions; Cold Weather Response 2018/19; Cartoon Festival; Receptions
held; the Draft Register of Electors; Draft Waste Bye Laws; Procurement; Value for Money; request
for update on legal cases; Citizens Digital Skills training. A number of Councillors supported the work
of Comhairle na nÖg and complimented the various initiatives under the Reuse Month 2018 and the
European Green Leaf initiatives including the 'Great Food from Green Cities' recipe book.
At 19.30 p.m., Cllr. D. Lyons took Chair of the Meeting. Cllr. P. Keane proposed an extension of time
to 20.45 p.m. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
Councillors debated NOM 18/17 and the merits and demerits of the proposal to prohibit election
posters in the Galway City area. Following discussion, Cllr. P. Flannery amended his Motion. The Chief
Executive confirmed that he would seek legal opinion on the matter. This was followed by a Vote:
NOM 18/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
5th November 2018 - Amended 12th November 2018
"In supporting a cleaner and safer environment, Galway City Council commits to develop and
implement a by-law prohibiting the use of election posters or the posting of any type of politically
motivated election material on public facilities or in publicly controlled spaces throughout the Galway
City area subject to legal advice".
5
In Favour: 9 Against: 8
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
5. NOTICES OF MOTIONS
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to
intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the harbour
authorities"
Not Considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister
Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have
access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for
professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children
during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care
and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to
make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put
children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as
regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC
level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme.
With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost
importance that proper incentives are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and
that the legislation in place is as inclusive as possible"
Not Considered.
6
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar an
gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil n6 ar a toil ag
Uachtarån na hOlIscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun cinn mar
chathair dhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing
so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the
European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not Considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and
2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region
approach to encourage new industries, .sectors and opportunities".
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches
broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in
order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order
to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has
been built by their efforts along with significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not Considered.
7
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus
licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli
Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and
Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galwa'/'
Not Considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new
criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will "honour our
commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement of the conflict". Galway
City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr. Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9
other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank
and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
NOM 8/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the HSE to
review the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in chronic pain,
outside those experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-december status while
this review is being undertaken."
Not Considered.
NOM 9/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct
hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge
it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not Considered.
8
NOM 10/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of the
indigenous people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental rights
and has refused to comply with international law; noting also that Israel continues to illegally occupy
and colonise Palestinian land, discriminates against Palestinian citizens of Israel, imposes an
inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza and denies Palestinian refugees the right to return to their
homes, Galway City Council fully supports and endorses the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and
Sanctions movement for freedom, equality and justice and commits itself to discontinue all business
contracts it has with Hewlett-Packard, both HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise for business and
government services, as well as the HP spin-off DXC Technology as HP and DXC provide and operate
much of the technology infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its system of apartheid and settler
colonialism over the Palestinian people.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on students,
and on the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also -Agrees that increased
housing for students will relieve demand on housing across the city; and also -Recognises the need
for additional housing to serve the city's student population; and further -Calls on the minister for
Housing, Planning and Local Government for the implementation of limits on increases in student
housing rents, in particular in areas that are designated as Rent Pressure Zones; and -Pending such
regulations, calls on housing providers within the City to limit fee increases for student housing to
the percentage rates allowed for Rent Pressure Zones; and -Directs the Chief Executive of the Council
to forward copies of the motion to the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, and
also to the Minister for Education and Skills. Further to forward copies to the Presidents of NUIG and
GMIT.
Not Considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand
the-Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun
Gong practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not Considered
NOM 17/18 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
9th October 2018
Date Received:
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Development Plan
2017-2023. This motion relates to lands located in Renmore adjacent to Renmore Road, Galway. The
9
purpose of this motion is to request a variation to the zoning of 0.05 Hectares (Ha) from 'RA'
(Recreation and Amenity) to 'R' (Residential).
The subject lands extend to approximately 0.05 Ha in size and forms part of an overall site comprising
approx. 0.299 Ha (See Figure 1 below). The current Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023
indicates that the site is zoned part 'R: Residential' and part IRA: Recreational and Amenity'. The 'R'
zoning designation applies to approximately 83% of the subject site (2477 sqm) while the remaining
17% is zoned 'RA' (510 sqm). Request and map distributed.
Cllr. D. McDonnell amended NOM 17/18 as follows on 12th November 2018. This Motion was
seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely.
'tl request that the Chief Executive prepare a Report pursuant to Planning Act 2018 to consider a
variation of the City Development Plan at land as per Motion 17/18 to allow development of housing.
Not Considered
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the
Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and
what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered
Q 4/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd
at the entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this effect
but no update has been given since.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our
area LIS meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Q 6/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
Can the housing department issue a list of active logged maintenance calls with Galway City Council,
specify when the calls were logged and what progress has been made on each case. Also, can the
Director give an assurance that a similar update can be given with the quarterly reports.
10
Written response to Q6/2018 issued to all Councillors on 12th November 2018.
Q 7/18 Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
6th November 2018
Date Received:
Can you please give an update on the Tourist Office in Salthill. What arrangements are in place to
have this unit used for the promotion of tourism of the area and the Wild Atlantic Way. Can this be
resolved before next years tourist season.
Written response to Q6/2018 issued to all Councillors on 7th November 2018.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
7.
1) Correspondence dated 17th October 2018 received from Community Work Ireland
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed to note same.
8.
CONFERENCES
Conferences & Training were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron and
approved.
1)
2)
3)
4)
Title: Dig: the value of archaeology for society and the economy
Date: 5th - 9th November 2018
Venue: Kilkenny (5th — 8th Nov) & Dublin (9th Nov)
Title: Housing Conference 2018
Date: 4th December 2018
Venue: Radisson Blu Royal Hotel, Dublin
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Peter Keane, Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Michael Crowe
Title: Approaches in Contemporary River Management
Date: 7th 8th & 9th December 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Billy Cameron & Cllr. Padraig Conneely
Title: EU Cohesion Policy 2014 - 2020
Date: 14th, 15th & 16th December 2018
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Frank Fahy
(RETROSPECTIVE)
11
5)
1)
9.
Title: Entitlement to Health Services
Date: 21st, 22nd & 23rd December 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Approved Training
Title: AILG Elected Members Module 6 Training — GDPR —General Data Protection Regulation
and the Elected Member
Date & venue: 15th November 2018 — Hotel Kilkenny, Kilkenny (Southern Region)
Date & venue: 17th November 2018 — Springfield Hotel, Leixlip (Dublin, Midland & Eastern
Region — Sat)
Date & venue: 22nd November 2018 — Hotel Kilmore, Cavan (Border & Western Region)
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. John Walsh, Cllr. Pearce
Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Peter Keane, Cllr. Billy Cameron, Cllr. Noel Larkin & Cllr.
Colette Connolly
VOTES OF SYMPATHY
/ CONGRATULATIONS
Sympathies
Mark James Daly, RIP
Mary Dempsey, RIP
Bridie Halloran, RIP
Joseph Martin, RIP
Jim Burke, RIP
Alfie Heenan, RIP
David Smith, RIP
Bryan Brophy, RIP
Michael Mullaly, RIP
Nell Casserly, RIP
The Mayor and Deputy Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those
recently bereaved including the members of staff of Galway City Council who were recently
bereaved.
Congratulations
President Michael D Higgins
Sean Oliver
Samuel Healy
Dara McDonagh
Brendan Chasseriaud
12
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed a 2pm start time for the Ordinary December Council Meeting which was
seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and agreed.
Mayor McNelis requested that the Meeting be held in committee in line with Standing Orders to
discuss an item of business of a special nature. Media and members of the public vacated the Council
Chamber to facilitate this. Following discussion in committee, the Media and Public were then invited
into the Council Chamber.
Mayor McNelis proposed that the Council considers NOM 15/18 & 17/18 as submitted by Councillor
D. McDonnell. This was agreed.
NOM 15/18 - Section 34 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Date Received:
9th July 2018
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Council Development
Plan 2017 — 2023 on lands at Ballybrit (adjacent to the Old Monivea Road). I formally request a
rezoning of 0.1Ha of land from "l" (Industrial) to "CI" (Commercial / Industrial) as per the hatched
area in the Attached Map. Note this request is effectively extending the Cl zoning to cover the entire
land parcel as shown in Light Blue on the attached Map". Map circulated.
Following discussion and reference to new regulations signed into law on 22nd October 2018, Cllr.
D. McDonnell amended this Notice of Motion as follows:
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
"l request that the CEO prepare a Report pursuant to the Planning Act 2018 to consider a variation
of the City Development Plan at lands as per Motion 15/18 to allow development on site of a
supermarket"
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
There was insufficient time to deal with NOM 17/18, as amended. Mayor McNelis proposed to
consider this Notice of Motion at the December Ordinary Meeting.
The Meeting concluded at 20.45 p.m.
d & Signed
Mayor of Galway
13
