Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 13th May 2019,
at 9.30am in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, P. Conneely, C. Connelly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T.
O'Flaherty, and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Ms. N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. P. Batty, Executive Engineer
Ms. H. Martyn, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. L. Sharkey, Administrative Officer
Ms. E. Silke, A/ Administration Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Finn, A/ Administration Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. T. Nethaway, Clerical Officer
Cllrs. C. Ö Conchüir, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, P. Flannery.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 9.31am, when a quorum was reached. The Mayor welcomed
attendees, and advised Members that the Special Meeting was called at the request of the Mayor under
Standing Order 5, to facilitate a request by Central Ward Members to start earlier, to enable
participation in an appointment that evening.
The Mayor advised Members that he would proceed through the Agenda in order, starting with Item 1 -
Draft Affordable Dwelling Scheme; Item 2 - Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy; and Item 3 -
Galway City Council Annual Report 2018.
The Mayor proposed to recess at 10.45am until 11.10am, with the Ordinary Meeting formally starting at
11.15am. The Meeting would break for lunch from 1.00pm to 1.45pm, and finish at 4.00pm. Cllr. M. J.
Crowe proposed breaking earlier, to meet at 11.00am as scheduled.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. T. C Flaherty
I propose to break earlier than 10.45am, in order to commence the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City
Council at 11.00am, as scheduled.
The proposal was unanimously agreed.
The Mayor advised Members that the Special Meeting would end at 10.40am, with the Ordinary Meeting
starting at 11.00am as scheduled.
Item 1 - Draft Affordable Dwelling Scheme
Mr. D. Mahon reported on Item 1 — Draft Affordable Dwelling Scheme. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members
that the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 (Part 5) Regulations 2019 (S.I. 81 of 2019) were
signed by the Minister on the 12th March 2019, and prescribe a number of matters under Part 5,
including matters relating to the schemes of priority, which are required to be made by housing
authorities pursuant to section 85 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009. The making of a
Scheme is a reserved function.
The Methodology includes an order of priority, where demand exceeds availability of dwellings. Galway
City Council is required to adopt a scheme before the 18th of June 2019. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members
that the Scheme is prescribed in a Statutory Instrument, with limited discretionary elements. Subject to
the approval of Members, the draft scheme would revert to the Department as the adopted Scheme of
Priority for Galway City Council. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members that the scheme would be operational
once dwellings were available, and recommended to the elected Members the adoption of the Draft as
set out.
Ms. L. Sharkey presented the details of the Draft Affordable Dwelling Scheme, and the draft order of
priority, and details of the Local Authority Equity Share. Ms. L. Sharkey advised Members that further
Regulations are to follow from the Department, which will determine further the details of the scheme.
At 9.40am, the Mayor requested all attendees to ensure their phones were on silent.
Comments and questions from Members included:
Maximum equity share and payback; advertising of scheme; market value of property; eligibility and
categories of applicants; affordable schemes in landbanks owned by Galway City Council; Ballybane and
Ballyburke sites; restrictions on sale of houses; payment of interest by Galway City Council on homes in
management of Voluntary bodies; housing targets; homeless hub; housing mix; Bothar na Coiste;
mortgage providers; liaison person for housing and finance; historic schemes with families paying 2 fees;
tenure mix; inclusion of the cost of the land in the market value; location of Merlin site; enforcement
relating to anti-social behaviour; .
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members' queries. He advised that Members were being
requested to adopt one element of an overall package of measures, with the only element under
consideration at this time being the order of priority. Income limits had not yet been set, but would likely
be in line with Rebuilding Ireland limits.
Mr. D. Mahon confirmed that the scheme would apply to those living within the functional area of the
City of Galway and would not include childcare under the education criteria. Schemes would be
advertised broadly as they arose. The equity share would be fully repayable to the Local Authority, with
Mr. D. Mahon strongly discouraging allowing a maximum 40% share. Additional Regulations will be
required in this regard.
21Page
Mr. D. Mahon advised Members that schemes including Ballyburke, Bothar na Coiste and Merlin would
benefit from a mix of Affordable Housing. An application had been made to the Department regarding
Bothar na Coiste, with the Department now seeking further clarifications. An application would be made
for lands at Merlin by the deadline of Friday 17th May, and a different funding model would be explored
in relation to Ballyburke. At present, there is no mechanism to allow the units at Ballybane become
Affordable housing units. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members that the breakdown of social housing on the
East and West sides of the city are 52:48.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
I propose that Galway City Council adopts the Draft Affordable Housing Scheme Order of Priority as
presented.
In favour: 14 Against: O
The Scheme was adopted.
Abstain: O
Present: 14
At 10.35am the meeting went into Recess, and ended at 11.00am.
Item 2 - Draft Climate Change Adaptation Strategy — not considered.
Item 3 - Galway City Council Annual Report 2018 — not considered.
Mi
31
Page
es, Co _ rmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
