Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 13th July, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F.
Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty
McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. B.
McNally, Director of Services
Ms. R.
Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. B.
Prendergast, A/Director of Services
Mr. T.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
L. Mitchell, Senior Executive Officer
Ms.
N. Moggan, Financial Management Accountant
Ms.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
MS.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath referred to the proposed order in which the Agenda of 13th July
might be tabled and discussed by the Council. He said that it is a matter for the City Council to
determine the order of business and the dates in which it might be transacted. The full Agenda
business has been spread across the six meetings which the Council has indicated it wishes to hold.
The meetings on the 15th, 20th 22nd 27th and 29th July inclusive will be adjournments of the meeting
of 13th July. He confirmed that the most up to date advice from the HSE is that Council meetings
should be limited to two hour duration and should be confined to a single meeting on any date.
Mayor Cubbard referred to the running order and proposed same as outlined. This was seconded by
Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
Mi s, Co:tmzed & Signed
Mayor UJ' e}olvøcy
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th June 2020 & Adjournments of meeting held on
10th, 15th, 17th, 22nd, 24th June, 1st & 6th July
Councillors discussed the draft minutes that were circulated and updates were sought on individual
items raised by Councillors including cycle lanes in Salthill.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe referred to the minutes of the meeting held on ISt July 2020. He advised that a motion
approved by Council at this meeting should have read as follows: 'That Galway City Council authorises
a drawdown in the sum of €485,000 from the Sinking Fund of the existing Marketing Fund in order to
assist in the implementation of the Galway City Tourism Strategy for 2020, which said sum is to be
immediately replenished once the current freeze on Budgetary Discretionary Spend is lifted.' The
original written motion submitted had a figure of €480,000, in error. The Meetings Administrator
concurred and advised that two figures were discussed during the course of this meeting and the
figure of €485,000 was outlined in Report distributed to Councillors. The insertion of the figure of
€485,000 was seconded by Cllr. P. Keane and agreed.
Mayor Cubbard proposed the adoption of item I(a).
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th
June 2020 & Adjournments of meeting held on 10th, 15th, 17th, 22nd, 24th June, 1st & 6th July
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
I(b) Minutes of Annual Meeting held on 26th June, 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Motion to Adopt Item I(b) — Draft Minutes of the Annual Meeting held on 26th June, 2020
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to an e-mail he issued to Councillors on Friday 10th July
regarding the removal of temporary COVID-19 parking restrictions from Salthill. He advised that
following from the Council Meeting on Monday 6th July, and the subsequent meeting with the West
Ward Councillors, where the proposal to provide a cycle lane along the promenade in Salthill was
discussed that it is the intention of the City Council, working with the National Transport Authority,
to continue the work on the proposal to provide for cycling provisions in this area but respecting the
Motion passed at Council, engagement has begun with The Village Salthill Committee.
Mr. B. McGrath advised that as that engagement is likely to run over the month of July and into early
August and having considered the Statutory Approval required for such a cycling intervention, if not
delivered immediately after an emergency measure under COVID-19, it is therefore necessary to
consider the parking restrictions in place at present in Salthill. He advised that the parking restrictions
were put in place during the Government "#StayatHome" order that came into effect at the beginning
of April. The removal of parking was to assist in restricting people visiting Salthill, when there was a
21 Page
high risk of transmission of the COVID-19 virus if social distancing was not adhered to. These
restrictions were introduced at that time on the recommendation of An Garda Sfochåna.
He referred to a Joint Inter-Agency Meeting between the HSE Public Health, Fire Service, Galway City
Council and An Garda Siochåna where the restriction on parking in Salthill was discussed. He said that
An Garda Siochåna have been monitoring the Salthill Promenade Area and have confirmed that in
line with the Government relaxations of restrictions under COVID-19, that they no longer require the
parking restrictions to remain in place. Therefore, the City Council removed cones/barriers in Salthill
on Saturday 11th July. All measures undertaken by the City Mobility Team are temporary in nature
and in response to COVID-19, and will remain under review, in consultation with An Garda Siochåna
and the HSE. Galway City Council will still proceed with the designs for a cycle facility in Salthill in
consultation with The Village Salthill Committee and will bring a report back to Council on this matter.
Mr. B. McGrath said that following extensive engagement with businesses in the Salthill area, who
are not in favour of the temporary cycle lane proposals as advanced, he advised that it is not his
intention to provide cycle lanes from a COVID perspective or by using executive emergency powers.
The Chief Executive indicated that the City Council can still implement this cycle lane as designed if
consensus can be achieved, subject to funding being available in accordance with the provisions of
the Roads Acts.
Councillors discussed the matter of cycle lanes outlining individually their support and concerns in
relation to same. Cllr. C. Connolly proposed 'That Galway City Council seek COVID-19 funding to
implement the Salthill cycle lanes as per Section 71 of the Roads Traffic Acts' and requested that a
roll call vote be taken on same. Councillors referred to a Motion submitted by Cllr. P. Keane and
approved at the Council Meeting held on Monday 6th July: 'Galway City Council resolves to postpone
the provision of a temporary cycleway as currently designed for the Salthill Promenade from Grattan
Rd to Blackrock pending full consultation with businesses in Salthill Village.'
Following discussion and consideration of Standing Orders, it was considered that the Motions are
not mutually exclusive and a roll call vote proceeded. In line with Standing Orders three Councillors
requested a roll call vote on the motion, namely, Cllr. M. O' Connor, Cllr. O. Hanley and Cllr. M.J.
Crowe. Mayor Cubbard read the motions submitted and a Roll Call Vote was taken:
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded: Cllr. M. O' Connor
'That Galway City Council seek COVID-19 funding to implement the Salthill cycle lanes as
per Section 71 of the Roads Traffic Acts'
In Favour: 5: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. Murphy
and Cllr. M. O' Connor
Against: 12: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. F. Fahy,
Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons,
Cllr. N. McNelis and Cllr. T. 0' Flaherty
Abstain: 1: Cllr. D. McDonnell
In Favour: 5 Against: 12 Abstain: 1 Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
3 IP age
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive informed the Meeting that Galway City Council convened a meeting
last week with our Principal Emergency Response Agency partners (PRAs), including An Garda
Siochåna, Health Service Executive and Fire Service, to discuss our joint concerns for the safety of the
public attending the city (centre) during Race Week during this public health pandemic. Although the
Galway Races will this year take place behind closed doors, it is anticipated that large numbers of the
public will visit Galway City and congregate in the city (centre area). At this meeting the Director for
Public Health in the HSE West outlined the risk of coronavirus transmission in densely populated
urban city centre locations. Owing to Galway's narrow streets, it will be difficult to achieve and
maintain social distancing for the public if numbers are not controlled.
The Gardai and Galway City Council will jointly be putting in place an external event management
plan for the city centre area for Race Week will take place from 27th July 2020 to 2nd August 2020. It
is proposed that the area will be cordoned into zones and that it will have numbers limited in each
zone to ensure public health advice on social distancing is achieved. The zones will be controlled by
pedestrian barriers and manned by Gardai. It is likely that these will also be glass free zones. Further
details will be communicated in due course and the Chief Executive asked that businesses and public
work collectively to ensure that the city centre is a safety area for all.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(e) Annual Financial Statement 2019
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive referred Councillors to the Unaudited Annual Financial Statements
including supporting schedules (AFS) for the year ended 31st December 2019 which had been
circulated in advance to members and outlined the content therein. He advised that the AFS is
normally presented to Members in April but the Department extended the deadline for the
completion of AFS 2019 to 30th June 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Mr. McGrath
recommended that the Statements be taken as read and queries raised may be responded to. It was
proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell to take the AFS as read and this was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and
agreed.
Councillors expressed satisfaction on the increases in rates, rents and housing loans collections.
Queries raised by Councillors included 2019 review of property tax; local property tax details and use;
grants and subsidies figures; procurement of professional services including legal services; vacant
sites and derelict site levies in the city; the funding allocated within Transfers and the detail for
prepayments. Access to the 2019 Budget was requested as it was noted that the current year only
2020 was held online.
Ms. Moggan and the Chief Executive provided replies to queries raised.
Mayor Cubbard and Councillors thanked Ms. Moggan for the report and complimented the Finance
team on their work.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive expressed gratitude and thanks to Ms. Moggan and the Finance team
for the presentation of the AFS in a timely manner given the challenging climate.
4 | Page
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to take a vote to consider approval of the three items hereunder:
Item 2(e) — Annual Financial Statement, 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
1. 'Approval of Annual Financial Statements (Unaudited) for year ended 31st December 2019.'
2. 'Approval of Transfers To/From Reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the Accounts.'
3. 'Approval of Over/Under Expenditure by Division as detailed in Note 16 of the Accounts.'
In Favour: 18 Abstain: O Against: O Present: 18
Item 2 (e) was approved by Members.
2(d) Part 8 Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) - Cappagh Park Floodlights
A Report dated 8th July 2020 from the Planning Department had been circulated to the Councillors on
the 3rd July 2020. Councillors discussed the report and expressed their thanks to the executive on the
timely production of the report. Matters raised included benefits to the community; directional
lighting having minimal effect on the residential area and the environment; unacceptable online
commentary; request for infrastructure in the Eastside and Ardaun area; temporary lighting; and the
cessation of pitch floodlighting at 10.30 p.m.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer responded to comments and queries raised. She advised that
temporary lighting will not be installed in the interim due to an environmental assessment and the
requirement to produce a natura impact statement, which would take a lengthy period of time. She
outlined the timescale for the project including manufacturing time and on site commissioning,
advising 30th November 2020 as the indicative date for its completion.
The Chief Executive added that when the pitch was initially developed ducting was put in as part of
the plan to provide for future lighting. He said that the lights will be delivered at the absolute
minimum timeframe.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
' To approve Part 8 Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended)
Cappagh Park Floodlights - per Report distributed dated 8th July 2020.'
In Favour: 18 Abstain: O Against: O
Present: 18
Item 2(d) was approved unanimously.
2(b) Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC) Annual Report 2019
Councillors discussed the Report and matters raised included: Claddagh basin and other open areas
with health and water safety concerns due to the congregation of crowds; drinking byelaws;
designated areas; drug dealing; sexual assault; CCTV; road safety; safety in estates from speeding;
speed vans; illegal parking; community safety responses and crime prevention; anti-social behaviour;
51 Page
community engagement; control of horses; request that signage be put on pay & display machines
regarding theft and not to leave valuables visible; JPC brief; representation on the JPC; role of
Community wardens and reporting of crime.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised advising that a number of matters
raised were Garda operational matters. He outlined the joint collaborative strategic committee work
done by the Joint Policing Committee.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Item 2(b) 'To note the Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC) Annual Report 2019.'
Item 2(b) was noted.
The meeting concluded at 5.00 p.m.
6 IP age
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
Attendance:
Minutes of the Adjournment of the July Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Wednesday 15th July, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: I. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty
Councillors: N. Larkin, N. McNelis & N. Murphy
McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. B.
McNally, Director of Services
Ms. R.
Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. B.
. Prendergast, A/Director of Services
Mr T.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr
C. Shaughnessy, Assistant Engineer
Mr.
E. Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms.
. R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
Mr
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms.
. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms
Mayor Cubbard opened the Meeting and commenced with Item 2(c) in the proposed running order
as agreed by Councillors.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(c) Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 for Disposal of Premises by way of Lease at
Westside, Galway
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer referred Members to the report circulated ISt July 2020. He
advised that Galway City Council wished to enter into a lease agreement with The Peter McVerry
Trust on the lands at B6thar le Chéile, Westside for the provision and management of 15 modular
accommodation units for a minimum period to 4th February 2024 and for the payment of a nominal
fee of €5 per annum each year of the agreement.
Mr. Prendergast confirmed that accommodation services on site are operated and managed by way
of a Service Level Agreement with Peter McVerry Trust who were selected by the Department of
Housing Planning & Local Government as the appropriate organisation to operate this category of
accommodation.
71 Page
The accommodation service commenced operation on 6th May 2020 under a temporary licence
agreement between Galway City Council and Peter McVerry Trust. He advised that the temporary
agreement was required as the elected members were not in a position to meet to consider a formal
lease due to COVID-19 restrictions in place. Mr. Prendergast recommended to Councillors that the
Section 183 be agreed and a formal lease be entered into between Galway City Council and Peter
McVerry Trust.
Councillors discussed the report and raised queries including: clarification on the reserved function
and statutory requirements; cost of the project; funding for running costs; rent; an update on other
site developments; maintenance issues; defects period and liability and potential future use of units.
A number of Councillors complimented the Housing team on the delivery of the units.
Mr. T. Prendergast and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised in detail.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2(d): To grant Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 for Disposal of Premises by way
of Lease at Westside, Galway.' — per Report circulated dated ISt July 2020.
In Favour: 12 Against: 1 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
Item 2(d) was approved.
2(a) To consider the raising of a loan for the acquisition of lands for the delivery of social &
affordable housing
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer referred Councillors to the report distributed on 3rd June 2020
which gives a breakdown of Galway City Council's primary housing land holdings of 23.5 hectares;
with 65% of the lands either under construction, in the approval process or the subject of a
development proposal. He advised the need to extend the City Council land bank beyond the
immediate term. He sought approval from Councillors to raise finance up to €15 million; which would
be expended on a phased basis for social and affordable housing subject to the Housing Finance
Agency and further Departmental approvals.
Councillors debated the urgent need for an affordable housing scheme and subsidies. Individual
Councillors raised matters including: government subsidy; land value costs; discussion on sites
included in the report; types of zonings on lands to be purchased; need for one bed units and a social
and affordable mix of units on sites; location of landbanks; proposed number of units to be built on
23.5 hectares; HFA interest rates; unsold affordable units; loan interest repayments; land aggregation
scheme; serviced sites funding and infill and turnkey developments.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 2(a): To approve the raising of a loan to a maximum of €15 million for the acquisition of lands
for the delivery of social & affordable housing - per Report circulated dated 3rd June2020.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 14
Item 2(a) was approved.
81 Page
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Draft notes of Procedures Committee meeting held on Friday 5th June 2020
3(b) Draft notes of Procedures Committee meeting held on Tuesday 30th June 2020
Councillors discussed the proposed schedule of adjournment dates and times for the July meeting.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to scheduled adjournment meetings on 27th and 29th July and the
commencement of Galway Race week on Monday 27th July.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
'That the Adjournment Meetings of the July Ordinary Meeting conclude on Wednesday 22nd July
2020.'
In Favour: 12 Against: 1 Abstain: 1 Present: 14
The Motion was approved.
Cllr. C. Connolly raised matter of the unsustainability of two meetings per week for Councillors in
other employment. It was requested that this matter be discussed at the next Procedures committee
meeting and that dates for any Procedures meetings be put on the extranet calendar for all
Councillors information.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To note item 3(a) and 3(b) Notes of Procedure committee meetings held on Friday 5th and 30th
June, 2020.'
Item 3(a) and 3(b) were noted and agreed.
3(c) Draft note of the joint Galway City and Galway County Council Corporate Policy Group meeting
held on Friday 10th July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To note item 3(c) Draft note of scheduled joint Galway City and Galway County Council CPG
meeting held on Friday 10th July, 2020.'
This was agreed and noted.
9 | Page
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(e) To receive an update on Public Lighting energy efficient upgrade programme
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer and Mr. C. Shaughnessy, Assistant Engineer gave a presentation on the
public lighting energy efficient upgrade programme which is part of the 2019 Climate Action Plan.
Mr. C. Shaughnessy gave a comprehensive presentation informing Councillors of the Galway City
Council public lighting system. His presentation included upgrade examples, colour temperatures;
existing versus LED public light comparisons and future works. As it was nearing 5p.m. Cllr. D.
McDonnell proposed the noting of the Report.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
'To note item 4(e) Update on Public Lighting energy efficient upgrade programme.'
This was agreed and noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To take item 4(e) Update on Public Lighting energy efficient upgrade programme at the beginning
of the next adjournment meeting scheduled for Monday 20th July 2020 to allow the presentation
to be completed.'
This was agreed.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To note Agenda Item 7: (a) to (f) Correspondence.'
This was agreed and noted.
The Chief Executive advised that a response to Question 2/2020 submitted by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
was issued. This was noted.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Item 10— Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and
seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons
The Meeting concluded at 5 p.m.
IO Page
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
Attendance:
Minutes of the Adjournment of the July Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 20th July, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: I. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. 0' Connor & T. 0' Flaherty
Councillors: J. Connolly & N. Larkin
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
C. Shaughnessy, Assistant Engineer
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
A. Lappin, Chairman, Galway 2020
P. Philbin, CEO, Galway 2020
Ms. M. Reddan, Head of Programme, Galway 2020
Mayor Cubbard opened the meeting and item 4(e) was taken as first on the agenda as agreed by
Council at the last adjournment meeting held on Wednesday 15th July 2020.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(e) To receive an update on Public Lighting energy efficient upgrade programme
Mr. C. Shaughnessy made the presentation to Councillors outlining the benefits from the
installation of energy efficient light-emitting diode (LED) to the Public Lighting network. It is
anticipated to achieve a minimum of 50% reduction in C02 emissions and energy usage
comparison to the existing traditional street lighting. LED's deliver a longer life span of the lamp
heads up to 100,000 hours (25 years) thus resulting in lower maintenance cost. Due to the
reduction in C02 and energy this aids in the Governments plan as set out under the National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Ireland (NEEAP), where the Public Sector is required to be 33%
more efficient by end of 2020 and a 2030 target of 50% more efficient. It provides a higher quality
of light, which results in greater clarity for road users, both pedestrians and vehicles traffic, this
greater clarity also provides better facial recognition for CCTV purposes therefore helping to
make an area safer.
Mr. U. Finn informed Councillors of the regional LED upgrade programme. The current
programme is an advanced works programme and he advised that Galway City Council propose
to enter into a Section 85 agreement under the Local Government Act, 2001 with Mayo County
11 |
Page
Council. This agreement would enable Mayo County Council to act as the lead authority to carry
out functions relating to the LED upgrade programme on behalf of Galway City Council. Mr. Finn
advised that he will revert to the Council in the future with any proposed Section 85 agreement
and also in regard to funding for the programme going forward.
Councillors discussed the presentation and raised a number of queries including finance; savings;
lighting in various areas of the city; replacement of old ESB poles and public lights; roll out for
estates and safer lighting; request for a proposed work schedule; selection process; energy
efficiency and warranty period.
Mr. C. Shaughnessy and Mr. U. Finn responded to queries raised. Mr. C. Shaughnessy also
advised Councillors that a tender has been published to procure a new contractor from
September for the maintenance and retrofit of public lighting.
4(f) Update on Draft Galway City Council Special Speed Limits Bye Laws 2020
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer referred to the draft Galway City Council Special Speed Limits Bye Laws
2020 proposal which were distributed to Councillors. He confirmed that the draft proposals were
considered by the Transportation & Infrastructure Strategic Policy Committee and that it is proposed
to begin the public consultation process in August 2020. He advised that the approval of Transport
Infrastructure Ireland is required in regard to proposed speed limit changes on the national roads.
Following the public consultation process a report and the proposed bye-laws will come before
Council in October for Elected Members to consider for adoption.
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer gave a detailed presentation on the special speed limits
review within Galway City including the background; legislation under the Roads Traffic Act 2004; the
draft special speed limit bye laws no. 1 2020 and the scope. Mr. McEvoy outlined all the proposed
changes in the Report issued to Councillors including 100km/h, 80km/h, 60km/h special speed limits,
50km/h built-up area speed limit and 30km/h (inner city) special speed limit proposals in the city. He
confirmed the next stages of the process are to issue statutory notice to the Garda Commissioner and
proceed with the public consultation process.
Mr. McEvoy advised that a separate review is to be completed in regard to the inclusion of additional
housing estates and separate Draft Bye-Laws (Housing Estates Slow Zones) are to be prepared.
Councillors discussed the Draft Bye Laws and raised matters and clarifications which included:
legislation; 30km/hr zones in estates; enforcement of the special speed limits; request for more
signage; difference between actual speed limits in certain areas and google maps speed limit feature;
support for and concerns over certain proposed speed designations; request for footpaths in advance
of any speed increases in relevant areas i.e. Dyke Road; road markings; road safety; traffic calming
measures; the public consultation process and advertisement of same; increase usage of driver digital
feedback signage and concerns regarding speed vans parking areas.
Mr. F. McEvoy and Mr. U. Finn responded to matters raised in detail. Mr. McEvoy advised Councillors
of the guidelines used which constitute a direction of the Minister for Transport. He confirmed that
the consultation period will be 30 days and that all submissions will be assessed individually.
12 | Page
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty referred to a Notice of Motion 68/2019 which she resubmitted and was numbered
Notice of Motion 16/2020 and requested that it be taken. She requested that the wording of same
be amended slightly as follows:
Notice of Motion 16/2020
Date Received: 6th July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
call on Galway City Council to consider introduce a 30km speed limit throughout all of the
residential estates in charge within the City Boundary, where feasible'.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'The Council endorse that the draft Galway City Council Special Speed Limits Bye Laws 2020
proceed with the public consultation process.'
In Favour: 16 Abstain: O Against: O
Present: 16
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Following a request from Cllr. D. McDonnell, It was agreed that a report on the public consultation
and the Draft Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws will be presented to Elected Members to consider for
adoption in the Autumn.
4(c) To receive an update in relation to Galway 2020 ECOC
Mr. A. Lappin, Chair Galway 2020 addressed the meeting and confirmed the securing of funding from
the Government to complete the revised 2020 programme. He referred to the adverse effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the cultural sector.
Mayor Cubbard and the Chief Executive declared to the meeting that they are members of the board
of Galway 2020.
Ms. P. Philbin, CEO acknowledged the severe challenges encountered by Galway 2020. She welcomed
the approval of the remaining funding by Government for the delivery of a re-imagined programme
of events, which will run until early in 2021. Ms. Philbin outlined funding received to date and the
current financial position; the service level agreement with the City Council including income and
expenditure as set out in quarterly status report QI 2020 that issued to Councillors. She updated the
Council on sponsorship and advised that pledges from private business sources were unlikely in the
current climate.
Ms. Philbin confirmed that Galway 2020 are working closely in consultation with artists; individual
local authorities, EU cultural partners and all key stakeholders on the delivery of a contracted
131 Page
programme of events later in the year and early next year. She confirmed that priority is being placed
on the delivery of Bid Book projects to ensure that these projects, and their local cultural partners
and artists, are supported to the greatest extent possible.
Ms. Philbin outlined the programme strategy in light of COVID-19 advising that ongoing restrictions
has required Galway 2020 to scale back both its operations and the cultural programme. She referred
to the termination of third party contracts; temporary lay-offs and a redundancy consultation process
with some of Galway 2020 staff. She further advised that all international work has been cancelled
and that an emphasis will be put on supporting local cultural partners working with the individual
local authorities in the delivery of the regional programme.
Ms. M. Reddan, Head of Programme, 2020 gave a presentation to Councillors summarising the
delivery structure of the Galway 2020 programme including 28 projects by cultural partners; 78 small
towns big ideas projects by communities facilitated by Galway 2020; 8 regional projects in partnership
with local authorities and Irish Public Bodies; a schools programme and partnership events. She
outlined the Language; Landscape & Migration themes. She referred to the momentous fire tour
opening ceremonies held in various areas of the county in the lead up to the opening ceremony finale
which unfortunately did not proceed; volunteers; the community cast; the spheres; drumming
instruments which are proposed to be gifted to communities; commissions; the media and
international delegations.
Ms. Reddan gave updates on other projects including Music for Galway and played a clip titled 'Savage
Beauty' where artist Kari Kola created the largest lit artwork ever made to display the extraordinary
beauty of the Connemara mountains to coincide with St. Patrick's Day celebrations.
As the time was nearing 5pm; Mayor Cubbard closed the meeting to recommence with an
adjournment meeting on Wednesday 22nd July 2020 at 3 p.m.
14 P
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
Attendance:
Minutes of the Adjournment of the July Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Wednesday 22nd July, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: I. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy & T. O' Flaherty
Councillors: J. Connolly, N. Larkin & M. O' Connor
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
Mr
. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
A. Lappin, Chairman, Galway 2020
Mr.
P. Philbin, CEO, Galway 2020
Ms. M. Reddan, Head of Programme, Galway 2020
Ms. S. O' Donnell, Transport Infrastructure Ireland
Mayor Cubbard opened the meeting and it was agreed to note the following agenda items:
4(g) To receive update on proposed variation to City Development Plan 2017-2023
Report noted.
4(k) To Receive a Report on the former Tourist Office at Salthill
Report noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(c) To receive an update in relation to Galway 2020 ECOC
Ms. M. Reddan, Head of Programme recapped on the Galway 2020 programme outlining the
brilliance and resilience in relation to the people; participation; place and depth of projects. She
informed Councillors on various projects including 'Sruth na Teanga' and the celebration of the Irish
language; the Tulca-Season of Visual Art; Literature projects; the Northern Peripheries - Galway Film
Centre; the Galway Film Fleadh; Eye on the Edge; John Gerard - Mirror Pavilions; Monument; museum
exhibitions; workshops with Galway based artists including Galway Community Circus addressing
mental health issues; Symphonic Waves; Hope it Rains - Soineann n6 Doineann; Wires crossed
showcasing the art of tight rope walking; Deeper Shades of Green where University Hospital Saolta
held performances for patients; Project Baa Baa; 'with their own neighbours'; Aerial/Sparks by Louise
Manifold and Gilgamesh. Ms. Reddan updated the meeting of the International Relations and EU
dimension and the Volunteers - The Wavemakers. She outlined the international legacy of Galway
2020 for art and culture and the development of tourism.
15 | Page
Councillors raised a number of queries and sought clarifications and discussed matters including:
request for a full, clear and more detailed breakdown of income and expenditure on the programme
including professional fees; details of contributions made to date by the City Council; total expected
costs; value for money; monies collected to date; details of costs of redundancies; openness and
transparency; request for enhanced communication to Councillors; breakdown of projects taken
place to date; schedule of indoor and outdoor events and the consideration of weather factors;
proposed use of monies due to cancellation of international events; fundraising/sponsorship;
whether the cost of opening ceremony is covered by insurance; legacy; tourism promotion and online
projects.
Mr. A. Lappin informed the meeting that Galway 2020 produce quarterly status reports covering
expenditure of the company on a timely basis and in line with best practices in governance. He
advised that the board of Directors of Galway 2020 were volunteers and received no fee and their
wish is to ensure an enormous legacy with the delivery of the European Capital of Culture for Galway.
Ms. Philbin responded to queries raised by Councillors in detail.
4(d) Update on proposed Cross City Public Transport Link under the Galway Transport Strategy
(To enable non-statutory public engagement to proceed, specifically to consider and propose noting
emerging preferred route of Dublin Road bus corridor)
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer gave a presentation to Councillors which included a pre-consultation
update on the Cross City link & Dublin Road Transport corridor. Mr. Finn gave an overview of the
Cross City Link bus priority routes; the inner City access route and city centre access network orbital
route. He proceeded to give a project update outlining the Cross City Link scheme specific objectives
and current status.
Ms. S. O' Donnell, Transport Infrastructure Ireland gave a virtual update to Councillors via zoom
technology on the Dublin Road Transport Corridor which included an overview; the stages of same:
development of emerging preferred option; non-statutory public consultation; feedback and
preliminary design and planning.
Councillors discussed the presentations in detail and raised queries which included: substantial land
take from Moneenagisha to Martin roundabout on the left hand side; if cycle lane separate to bus
lane at Merlin Park; difficulty for buses to overtake on incoming bus lane; will bus or public transport
get priority; reference to rejection of Merlin Woods/Merlin Lane; request to contact all bus operators
both private and public and request for extensive advertisement of the consultation process including
on social media; mobility team; access through hospital; options for Skerritt Roundabout and request
for a meeting regarding Skerritt roundabout with a display at Galway Mayo Institute of Technology;
Galway Clinic and better access required out of Roscam/Doughiska.
Mr. U. Finn responded to queries raised and advised Councillors that it was proposed to start the non-
statutory public consultation at the end of August for a six week period. He advised that information
will be available virtually for all stakeholders including landowners to participate and to examine the
design of the route in detail. He confirmed that he will revert to Councillors at the end of that period.
161 Page
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To enable non-statutory public engagement to proceed and the consideration and noting of the
emerging preferred route of the Dublin Road bus corridor.'
In Favour: 15 Abstain: O Against: O
Present: 15
The Motion was approved unanimously.
The Mayor wished all well for the remainder of the Summer and the Meeting concluded at 5 p.m.
171 Page
