Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in Leisureland,
Salthill and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 13th September, 2021 at
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
3.00 p.m.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; E. Hoare; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy
& M. O'Connor
Councillors: M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; P. Keane; N. Larkin;
D. Lyons & T. O'Flaherty
P. Philbin, Director of Services
P. Greene, Director of Services
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
D. Smyth, Head of Finance
Mr.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
. E. Naughton, Head of ICT
Ms
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Ms.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. L. Sharkey, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Ms. S. Gilroy, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the
agreed protocol for meetings. He requested attendees to wear a face covering when moving around
the facility.
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting including Ms. P. Philbin and wished her every
success in her new role as Director of Services. She advised that Ms. Philbin will be acting as Deputy
Chief Executive for part of the meeting.
Minutes, Confirmed & Si
a
1
Mayor of Galway
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator referred to page 5 of the minutes ofthe ordinary meeting
held on the 12th July 2021 under agenda item 2(b) Disposal of Land/Premises by Way of Lease at
Carnmore, Co. Galway pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, and Section 211 of the
Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 and requested that as a matter of accuracy
the name of the proposed leasee 'Danü Media Teoranta' be inserted into the motion passed by
Council. This was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons, seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed the following:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
That agenda item 2(a) Annual Accounts of Galway Harbour Company be heard at the
adjournment meeting scheduled for Monday 27th September and that the rest of the agenda be
considered in the order as set out.
This was agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th July 2021 and adjournment meeting held on
19th July 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Cllr. D. Lyons pointed out a minor spelling error with the letter f' of the word September missing in
the last paragraph on page 9 of the minutes of the adjournment meeting held on 19th July. This error
was noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 12th July 2021 and adjournment meeting held on the
19th July 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(b) Proposed Material Contravention of Galway City Development Plan — (Aldi Stores (Ireland)
Ltd. - Planning application reference 20/332)
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services gave a background to the proposed material contravention of
the Galway City Development Plan. He advised that in order to pass a resolution to grant permission,
three quarters of all the Elected Members must vote in favour of same. He invited any queries from
Councillors.
Councillors discussed and welcomed the proposal with matters and clarifications raised including
bus routes; delivery times; controlled crossing; cycle lanes and strategy; transport network;
opport
in the community; reference to the function of
2
Councillors and the benefits an advance presentation would have been; queries regarding transport
infrastructure assessment and clarity regarding response to further information; history and status
of previous planning permissions on this site, concerns for cycling community and accessibility for
pedestrians from public transport; potential lack of use of basement parking and clarification
regarding any contravention of retail strategy.
Mr. U. Finn welcomed the positivity of the Council regarding this proposed development confirming
that there is a current bus route servicing the area and that the development of cycling schemes are
progressing on the east side of the city.
Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner responded to queries raised and referred to proposed planning
conditions that will be attached to the proposed development.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator advised Council that in order to pass a resolution to grant
permission, that the number of the members of the planning authority voting in favour of the
resolution is not less than three-quarters of the total number of the 18 members of the planning
authority, or where the number so obtained is not a whole number, the whole number next below
the number so obtained shall be sufficient, being 13 Councillors. He proceeded to take a roll call
vote:
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approval of Material Contravention of Galway City Development Plan — (Aldi Stores (Ireland)
Ltd. - Planning application reference 20/332) - per Report circulated on 8th September 2021
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Crowe,
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane,
Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy,
Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 18
The Material contravention was granted and approved unanimously.
2(c) Draft City Development Plan — update on proposed timelines
Mayor C. Connolly queried if Councillors wished for a brief presentation orto consider the document
as read.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested a brief presentation on the matter.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed that the document be taken as read and proposed the acceptance of the
recommendations contained therein. This was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
The Chief Executive gave a brief update on the proposed timelines for the Draft City Development
Plan. He referred to planning legislation which allows for an extension of time of up to one year for
the process for the making of the City Development Plan, which is currently a two year process. He
informed the meeting of the extensive work that has been carried out to date. He referred to the
draft Housing Strategy which has just been completed and some other studies that are in progress
3
including environmental assessments; flood risk assessment; retail strategy and the building height
and density study. He recommended that the current stage be extended by a seven week period up
to the 15th November 2021 and noted that the entire process will still be completed within the
current two year period by the end of 2022 with the new Plan commencing in January 2023.
Mr. McGrath referred to four proposed workshops in December (four hour sessions with a start
time to be agreed) on the Thursday 2nd, Friday 3rd, Tuesday 7th and Wednesday 8th, December 2021
for the consideration of Councillors. It was noted that further meetings or workshops can be
scheduled, if required.
Cllr. D. McDonnell advised that he will be unavailable on 2nd and 3rd December due to other
Councillor commitments, but he requested that he may raise queries regarding said workshops on
the 7th or 8th December, if required.
The Chief Executive advised that Councillors could raise queries at any stage of the interactive
workshops, if they so wish.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
That no overall extension of time is required for the making of the draft Galway City Development
Plan 2023 - 2029
That the current stage of the preparation of the draft city development plan be extended by seven
weeks
That the workshop scheduled for the 2nd 3rd 7th and 8th December, 2021 proceed as proposed
This was agreed and approved unanimously.
2(d) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition / construction of
properties by Approved Housing Bodies - 111 Upper Newcastle Road, Galway
Councillors discussed the Report circulated and concerns were raised by some Councillors regarding
the number of homelessness services in the Newcastle area.
Ms. H. Martyn, A/SEO responded to matters raised and emphasised the benefits of the proposed 10
x I-bed accessible units for use in the provision of housing for older people and people with reduced
mobility to be constructed by the Galway Simon Community.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
o consider the document as read and approve the raising of a Loan under the Capital
Assistance Scheme for the acquisition / construction of properties by Approved Housing Bodies —
11 Upper Newcastle Road, Galway - per Report circulated 8th September 2021
This was agreed and approved unanimously.
4
2(e) To fix a date for Annual Budget Meeting
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator referred to a proposed date for the Annual Budget
meeting and confirmed that following a recent Procedures committee meeting that the date
proposed is Monday 22nd November, 2021 and not Monday 29th November, 2021 as noted in the
draft minutes of the Procedures Committee meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
o approve the Annual Budget Meeting to be held at 3pm on Monday 22nd November, 2021.
This was agreed unanimously.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
o hold a Special meeting of Galway City Council at 3pm on Monday 20th September in Leisureland
and online to consider Chief Executive's Reports and Quarterly Reports on the September agenda.
This was agreed unanimously.
The Chief Executive advised that he has a prior commitment on Monday 20th September but that he
will endeavour to join the latter part of the meeting online from 4pm.
Councillors discussed alternative time starts for the meeting. It was agreed that the start time
remain at 3pm.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Procedures Committee meeting of 9th September 2021
Mr. G. McMahon re-iterated the approved Budget meeting date of Monday 22nd November, 2021 and
not Monday 29th November, 2021 as noted in the draft minutes of the Procedures Committee on
page 3 and the table on page 4. This amendment was noted and agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
To note the Procedures Committee meeting minutes, as amended regarding budget meeting date
scheduled for Monday 22nd November, 2021.
This was agreed unanimously.
5
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Cycle Network Projects Update - To conclude with contributions from remaining
Councillors
Mayor C. Connolly invited contributions from the remaining Councillors.
Councillors discussed the cycle network update and matters and clarifications raised included a
request for larger updated maps, next steps in consultation process for Clybaun Road, B6thar
Stiofån, query if the same online consultation portal similar to the City Development Plan will be
used and what scale of changes that will be considered; reference to availability of national funding
for a temporary cycleway in Salthill and if any planning and legal requirements regarding same;
reference to three routes selected for a tendering process in the Eastside and implications for the
other two routes not currently progressing; parking concerns in Salthill and the need for
consultation with businesses; status of Millars Lane enhanced maintenance, request to examine the
potential for a cycle lane from Rahoon to Westside to the University, regulations regarding
motorised e-scooters, health and safety supports for cycle to schools programme; Active Travel
projects and the need for accountability and not making cycling a less attractive choice; request for
timelines regarding all projects including Doughiska to Dublin Road to Briarhill and City Centre to
Ballyloughane-Doughiska; need for a cycle lane from Martin Roundabout to Briarhill; shared road
space for motorists and cyclists unsuitable due to the road culture in Ireland and the raising of safety
concerns; request for update on the Eastside greenway; reference to the disappearance of cycling
infrastructure when individuals cycling in the Ballybane area; clarification and request to advertise
proposals for Dr. Mannix Road; Devon Park; Clifden Park and Upper and Lower Salthill; request for
a plan for Grattan Road to Kingston Cross; B6thar na dTreabh not fit for purpose due to proximity
to motorway; request for a public workshop; reference to accident near misses at Dyke Road; need
for cycling facilities; and residents only parking; kissing gates inappropriate at the West side cycle
park; update on staff recruitment and query if results from survey will be published.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed that a workshop be facilitated. This was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis
and agreed by Council.
Mayor C. Connolly referenced the motion she raised at the July Ordinary meeting which was
seconded by Cllr. N. Murphy. She requested a response from the executive regarding same: "That
Galway City Council shall urgently seek to create a two way segregated cycle track on a temporary
basis along the coastal side of Salthill promenade, specifically the R336 from the junction with
Grattan Road up to where the R336 meets with the R337, and shall immediately apply for COVID-
19 funding or any available alternative source of funding to facilitate this".
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer and Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer responded to queries raised. Mr.
Finn advised that a workshop can be facilitated for Councillors potentially later in the month.
4(d) Arts Act Grants 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To note and approve the Arts Act Grants 2021.
This was agreed unanimously.
6
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Agenda Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations be approved.
This was agreed.
Votes of Sympathy
Pat O'Connell, R.I.P.
Mary O'Connell, R.I.P.
Votes of Congratulations
Galway Rowing Club, Colåiste lognåid Boat Club & NUI, Galway Boat Club
All Ireland Senior Women Camogie Team
Rita Ann Higgins
9. CONFERENCES
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Agenda Item 9. Attendance at Conferences be approved.
This was agreed.
(a) Title: Celtic Conferences — Health & Safety in the Workplace
Venue: O'Donovans Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 24th, 25th & 26th September 2021
Cllr. D. McDonnell was approved to attend.
(b) Title: Celtic Conferences — The Fair Deal Scheme
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Date: ISt 2nd & 3rd October 2021
(c) Title: Celtic Conferences — Mental Health & Wellbeing
Venue: O'Donovans Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 8th, 9th & 10th October 2021
(d) Title: Public Services 2021
Venue: Dunboyne Castle Hotel, Co. Meath / Online
Date: 14th October 2021
(e) Title: Celtic Conferences —A Practical Guide to Budget 2022
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Date: 15th 16th & 17th October 2021
Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. J. Connolly were approved to attend
The meeting concluded at 16:57pm
7
DRAFT Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting Adjournment of Galway City Council
held in Leisureland, Salthill and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 27th
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
September, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly;
O. Hanley; E. Hoare; P. Keane; D. Lyons; N. McNelis;
N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
Councillors: M. Cubbard; M.J. Crowe; F. Fahy; C. Higgins;
N. Larkin; D. McDonnell & T. O'Flaherty
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services
Mr. D. Smyth, Head of Finance
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. C. O'Dowd, Galway Harbour Company
Mr. M. O'Gorman, Galway Harbour Company
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms. E. Naughton, Head of ICT
Mr. C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Ms. H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. P. Staunton, Executive Planner
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. R. O'Reilly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting and requested a roll call of Councillors present in
Leisureland and online. This was completed by Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator.
Mayor C. Connolly advised that Mr. C. O'Dowd and Mr. M. O'Gorman will be present later in the
meeting regarding agenda item 2(a) Annual Accounts of Galway Harbour Company as agreed at the
Council meeting held on 13th September 2021.
Mayor C. Connolly gave her condolences on behalf of the Council to Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of
Services on the passing of his father in law.
8
Cllr. J. Connolly requested that discretion be used regarding the time limit of Ihr 55mins and that the
time limit be extended in order to consider the Housing Quarterly Report. A number of Councillors
supported the consideration of the Housing Quarterly Report at the meeting or at a Special meeting.
Mr. G. McMahon re-iterated current standard operating guidelines for attendance at Council
meetings. He also advised that there will be a change of venue from Leisureland to a more suitable
location with adequate meeting facilities coming into the winter for future Council meetings.
Cllr. D. Lyons advised that at the meeting of 13th September he requested that the Special meeting
on 20th September be called to consider the Chief Executive Reports together with the Quarterly
Reports not as was listed on the agenda for same: 1. Quarterly Reports and 2. Chief Executive Reports.
Mayor C. Connolly advised that is was agreed at the Special meeting on the 20th September to
consider the individual Quarterly reports along with elements of the Chief Executive Reports relating
to same.
Councillors discussed options for the consideration of the housing quarterly report.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
That the Housing Quarterly Report (July-September) and 'Housing for All - a New Housing Plan
for Ireland' be considered as a matter of urgency at the October ordinary meeting scheduled
for Monday 11th October after the confirmation of minutes.
This was agreed.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to a motion that she raised at the Council meeting on the 19th July 2021
"That Galway City Council shall urgently seek to create a two way segregated cycle track on a
temporary basis along the coastal side of Salthill promenade, specifically the R336 from the junction
with Grattan Road up to where the R336 meets with the R337, and shall immediately apply for COVID-
19 funding or any available alternative source of funding to facilitate this". She advised that she has
amended same and that she wished for the amended motion to be considered at the meeting.
Mr. G. McMahon advised for information purposes that a response had issued on Friday 17th
September regarding Mayor C. Connolly's original motion submitted at the July Ordinary Council
adjournment meeting on 19th July 2021.
Mr. G. McMahon proceeded to read Cllr. C. Connolly's amended motion "That Galway City Council
shall urgently seek to create a two-way segregated cycle track on a temporary basis along the coastal
side of Salthill promenade, specifically the R336 from the junction with Grattan Road up to the
junction of the Prom/Blackrock Tower and a one-way cycle track from the latter junction up to where
the R336 meets with the R337, and shall immediately apply for COVID-19 funding or any available
alternative source of funding to facilitate this". This was seconded by Cllr. N. Murphy
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services advised that any cycleway, temporary or permanent will require
planning permission.
9
Cllr. D. Lyons advised that he wished to submit an amendment motion.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to both the motion she submitted and the amendment motion submitted
by Cllr. D. Lyons and proposed that they be considered by Council without debate. Councillors
discussed same and matters raised included the need for drawings/plans to make a decision on the
matter. It was agreed to put this to a vote.
A roll call vote was taken on the matter.
"That the motions submitted by Mayor C. Connolly and Cllr. D. Lyons to Council be
considered by Council without debate"
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. C. Higgins;
Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
Against: Cllr. A Cheevers; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons;
Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr, T. O'Flaherty
Abstain: Cllr. O. Hanley
In favour: 8 Against: 8 Abstain: 1 Present: 17
As there is equity of votes, Mayor C. Connolly chose to exercise a second or casting vote in line
with Standing Orders in favour of the motion.
In favour: 9 (including casting vote) Against: 8 Abstain: 1 Present: 17
The motion was passed.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that the word "one" be inserted into the fourth last line of the motion he
submitted instead of the word "two". This was noted and agreed.
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment is considered first. Mr. McMahon, Meetings
Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote on the amendment:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
I propose that Councillor Connolly's Motion remain on the City Council agenda. In the meantime
that Galway City Council brings forward a report no later than the first Galway City Council
meeting in January 2022 outlining the plan with drawings for a two way segregated cycle track
taking into account the loss of car parking spaces on the coastal side of Salthill Promenade, the
loss of designated disability car space parking, to outline how the one way cycle track will
proceed from Blackrock to the Barna Road junction given the limited road widths at that
location and will there be need to seek private lands to accommodate the cycle track even on
a temporary basis.
In favour: Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. McNelis;
10
Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
In favour: 5 Against: 13 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
In line with Standing Orders as the amendment was defeated, the original motion is now considered.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote on the original motion:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. N. Murphy
"That Galway City Council shall urgently seek to create a two-way segregated cycle track on a
temporary basis along the coastal side of Salthill promenade, specifically the R336 from the
junction with Grattan Road up to the junction of the Prom/Blackrock Tower and a one-way
cycle track from the latter junction up to where the R336 meets with the R337, and shall
immediately apply for COVID-19 funding or any available alternative source of funding to
facilitate this".
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane;
Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. D. Lyons
In favour: 17 Against: 1
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O Present: 18
2(a) Annual Accounts of Galway Harbour Company
Mr. M. O'Gorman, Chairperson of the Galway Harbour Company and Mr. C. O'Dowd presented to
the meeting.
Mr. C. O'Dowd raised matters for discussion including: 2020 financial performance (audited); results
to date in 2021 (unaudited); Outlook; COVID 19; Renewable Energy and other matters including a
new port planning application; inner dock development and ongoing business development,
including offshore wind. He confirmed the transfer of shareholding effective ISt January 2021 to
Galway City Council; that quarterly meetings were held with the Chief Executive and Head of Finance
and that the Annual General Meeting was held.
Councillors welcomed the presentation and matters raised included: operation of car park by the
port or is it leased; parking income; query on high legal fee costs in 2019; Trans-European Transport
Network (TEN-T) classification criteria; viability of the naval service with difficulties in attracting
personnel, and, if any security concerns; update on An Bord Pleanåla planning decision; inner dock
proposal timelines and accessibility to citizens; status of risks on the site; reference to submission
made for a base for the Defence Forces in Galway city; update on research centre; sustainability of
wind energy and if any commitment from Government for funding; proposal that the Northern and
Western Regional Assembly will be seeking funding; request for update on proposed housing on the
11
old site and if this can proceed in the absence of a planning decision; Climate Change; concerns
regarding length of time leases granted for and depreciation costs.
Mr. O'Gorman and Mr. O'Dowd responded to queries raised by Councillors.
4(b) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Mr. G. McMahon referred Councillors to the report distributed in February 2021 and gave an update
to Council on the matter of webcasting or live streaming of meetings, Associated/Estimated costs
and Current Issues.
Mr. N. Murphy referred to a motion he submitted as follows: "In May 2021 the department of local
government stated that "Guidelines will issue for the use of live streaming for official meetings". I
propose that we defer item 4(b) until such guidance is received. Rational: The statement from the
Department is in UAction plan to deliver non-pay recommendations set out in the Moorhead Report",
published May 2021. I believe that if we made any decision on webcasting now, then the guidelines
issued later may conflict with our decision and leave us out of step with other local authorities. We
should consider this matter after the guidelines are issued. This was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
Councillors discussed same and matters raised included funding; arrangements in other local
authorities and organisations and broadcasting.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed the consideration of the motion submitted by Cllr. N. Murphy and
seconded by Cllr. Fahy. This was accepted and agreed by the majority of Councillors. Cllr. M.J. Crowe
did not agree and Cllr. O. Hanley disagreed advising that he believed that members of the public
should be facilitated to attend meetings online.
Cllr. E. Hoare requested that the motion he submitted at the Special Council meeting on 20th
September be amended. Following a discussion on the motion, it was agreed for Council to consider
the motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
"That Galway City Council contact NIJIG with a view to trialling a park and ride facility at Corrib
Village. The trial will be for weekends only and will operate from October 2021 to January 2022.
The service will allow the public to use the parking facilities at Corrib Village. Users will then be
able to take the 404 bus route into the City Centre. There is a bus stop and shelter already in place
at Corrib Village on the Upper Newcastle Road.
There is currently a park and ride facility operating Monday to Friday and is used by college
students and staff. This is not used at weekends. If trialled this service provide access to a reliable
bus service to thousands of residents from Bushypark, Ballagh Road and Circular Road. There is
currently no bus service for these areas."
The Motion was approved unanimously.
The meeting concluded at 16:56pm.
12
4(c) Galway City Council Digital Strategy - Not Considered.
4(e) Urban Regeneration Development Fund (URDF) - Not Considered.
4(f) "Housing for All" — Policy Document - Not Considered.
4(g) Schools' Street Pilot Recommendations - Not Considered.
4(h) Chief Executive's Reports - Not Considered.
ii.
July 2021
September 2021
4(i) Quarterly Report, April —June 2021- Not Considered.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan, Thomas
Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at Kilmainham
Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery '
Not considered
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should be
fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not considered
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services Union)
asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures during the
13
pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to discuss what
direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not considered
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not considered
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not considered
Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Supported by: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins;
E. Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
ccommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and
Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water
Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works
together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently
being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not considered
14
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its
own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not considered
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not considered
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and
in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission
from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal
quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not considered
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021 - Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily
off the road due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of
their condition.
Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not considered
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic
Act 2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-
keeping with a cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall
be presented as standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
Not considered
15
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the
use of automated signage.
Not considered
NOM 33/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 22nd June 2021
Galway City Council acknowledges the need for a new national maternity hospital (NMH) to
provide the highest quality healthcare in Dublin, and across Ireland.
Galway City Council notes the lack of legal clarity regarding the ownership and management
of the hospital, and also acknowledges the concerns regarding the employment rights of
those who will work in the hospital.
Galway City Council agrees to write to the Minister for Health to call for the proposed new
publicly-funded NMH to be constructed on land owned by the State; and that, to guarantee
its secular ethos, the new facility be fully owned and governed by the State. If this motion
is passed it is agreed that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.
Not considered
NOM 34/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 3rd July 2021
Galway City Council would develop a re-surfacing scheme for the Salthill Promenade.
Reply issued with Agenda 8th September 2021
NOM 35/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 5th July 2021
That this Council again calls on the NTA to provide a bus route for Upr. Ballymoneen Road
and engage with operators to deliver same. With two new developments built by City
Council and a third to seek planning and also a new school, it is important that public
transport be made available for residents. It is not appropriate to expect residents to walk
to Western Distributor Road as this does not promote use of public transport.
A copy of this motion to be sent to Minister for Transport.
Not considered
NOM 36/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 18th August 2021
I am proposing that proper attractive wooden hoarding be placed around all future
construction sites during the building of local authority housing, similar to that usually
erected around sites for private development. I have received a number of complaints from
residents in the Ballybane/Ballybrit area regarding the steel see-through fencing placed
around the building site in Ballybane where construction of local authority housing is
underway.
Reply issued with Agenda 8th September 2021
16
6. QUESTIONS
Question 14/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
To ask for an update on Galway City Council's Vacant Site Register; was the €322,000 due in
January from the 6 sites on the register, per the latest update to the Planning SPC, collected
to support the provision of housing and regeneration of land by the Council, has a review of
the next sites progressed and if so what is the number of individual sites identified at this
stage, and will the Council update Councillors should additional sites be added to the
Register?
Reply issued on 10th September 2021
Question 16/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd June 2021
What works are required to enable Galway City Council to remove the Perspex sheeting
surrounding the Browne Doorway and ensure the safe continued display of the doorway at
its current location in Eyre Square? Can costings be provided for the required work?
Not considered
Question 18/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 6th July 2021
Can a report issue to Councillors to explain why a GCC 2016 commissioned report into
Galway's Waterways carried out by JBA Consultants has not been released to the Elected
Members. An explanation as to why this report remains in Draft Format and what are the
reasons for the Executive in not finalising the report.
Reply issued on 10th September 2021
Question 19/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 18th August 2021
What is the situation regarding the former Corrib Great Southern Hotel, why has the
demolition of the building not taken place, has the planning permission run out for the
demolition, and has the City Council taken any legal proceedings in relation to the site.
Reply issued with Agenda 8th September 2021
Question 20/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 6th September 2021
Could an update please be given on the masterplan progress for the Kingston Lands in
Knocknacarra. I have been asked by residents, parents in the nearby schools and sports
clubs what are the realistic timelines for the start and finish of this project?
What monies have been secured for this to date and what is necessary to complete?
What needs to be done to progress this much needed project?
The development of these lands for recreation and amenity are now more necessary then
ever as the population of Knocknacarra grows, the recent efforts by the schools for a park
and stride show no room for parking in area, there is no pitch beside St. John the Apostle
school many students have missed out and graduated with no pitches beside them, all the
sports clubs have received record admissions this year and both Cappagh Pitches and
Millers Lane fully used the need for more facilities is greater than ever.
Reply issued on 10th September 2021
7. CORRESPONDENCE -Not Considered
(a) Correspondence dated 8th June 2021 received from Monaghan County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 11th June 2021 received from Joe O'Neill, Chair, Western Region
Drug & Alcohol Task Force
(c) Correspondence dated 14th June 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
(d) Correspondence dated 25th June 2021 received from Waterford City & County Council
(e) Correspondence dated 25th June 2021 received from Clare County Council
(f) Correspondence dated 28th June 2021 received from Kerry County Council
(g) Correspondence dated 28th June 2021 received from Clare County Council
(h) Correspondence dated 29th June 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(i) Correspondence (Circular LG 02/2021) dated 30th June 2021 received from Department of
Housing, Local Government & Heritage
(j) Correspondence dated 6th July 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
(k) Correspondence dated 7th July 2021 received from Senator Robbie Gallagher
(l) Correspondence dated 12th July 2021 received from Private Secretary to Minister Eamon
Ryan (Notice of Motion 5/2021 — Cllr. N. McNelis)
(m) Correspondence dated 13th July 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(n) Correspondence dated 13th July 2021 received from Clare County Council
(o) Correspondence dated 13th July 2021 received from Clare County Council
(p) Correspondence dated 14th July 2021 received from Private Secretary to Minister for
Health (Notice of Motion 6/2021 — Cllr. N. McNelis)
(q) Correspondence dated 9th August 2021 received from Department of Housing, Local
Government & Heritage — Circular Letter NRUP 04/2021 — Development Plans, Draft
Guidelines for Planning Authorities
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
18