Presidinz:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 13th November, 2017,at 4.00 p.m.
in Galway City Council, Galway
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Present: Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh
In Attendance:
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms
B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
H. Kiely, CEO of Galway2020,
. Connell, Director of Services,
E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms. P. Philbin A/Director of Services,
N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance,
L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer,
D. Flood, A/Senior Executive Engineer,
. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
T.
G.
A.
Ms. M. Coen, Senior Staff Officer.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery requested that the Meeting be held in committee to discuss two items of
business of a special nature and this was agreed by Members. Media and members of the
public were requested to leave the Council Chamber for a short period to facilitate the
committee meeting in line with Standing Orders.
Following conclusion of the meeting held in committee, the Media and Public were then
invited into the Council Chamber and the Ordinary Meeting resumed. Mayor Flannery advised
of the Motions agreed and passed at the in committee meeting:
to accord Freeman of Galway City, Honoras Causa to the Mayor of Boston, Marty Walsh
to acknowledge his achievements.
to offer Dr. Jim Browne the honour of a Civic reception in recognition of his achievements.
On a point of clarification, Cllr. Connolly queried the procedure followed regarding the
proposal of a Freeman as outlined in Standing Order No. 114. Mayor Flannery confirmed that
in line with Standing Orders he contacted each of the members of the Procedures Committee
and obtained their advice on the proposal. Cllr. C. Connolly expressed her dissatisfaction with
the procedure taken and that a formal meeting of the Procedures Committee was not held.
1
1.
(a)
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 9th
October 2017
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron Seconded: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. B. Cameron referred to Item 3(c) Draft Strategic Plan for Housing Persons with Disabilities
2017 on the October Ordinary Meeting Agenda and advised that he had submitted a second
Motion on this matter. The Mayor advised that the Motion submitted in writing was not
seconded on the submission. Cllr. B. Cameron confirmed that he will re-submit his Motion
later in the Meeting and Mayor Flannery agreed to same.
Matters Arising:
A synopsis of matters arising raised by Councillors were:
Cllr. N McNelis referred to St. Anne's, Lenaboy which was raised at the October Council
meeting and requested an update on the proposed Children's artistic hub, funding
available and whether any representations were received from groups. Mr. B. McGrath
confirmed that agreement in principle has been reached with the Mercy Order to transfer
lands to Galway City Council and to convert St. Anne's, Lenaboy into a cultural hub for
children and young persons as part of the Cultural Strategy. The Chief Executive confirmed
that one group and some individuals had contacted him as former residents. He also
advised that ERDF funding of €1.5 million approximately will be availed of for the building
with accessible work spaces and appropriate space for Artists in Residence. He confirmed
that it is anticipated contracts will be signed in the coming months.
Discussion on the funding under the Sports Capital Grant Scheme for various projects
including Cappagh Park and Renmore Football Clubs and request for confirmation as to
when Sports Capital Grants for 2017 will be announced by the Department of Transport,
Tourism & Sport. Mr. B. McGrath confirmed that a decision regarding funding was
imminent;
Ballifoile Community Centre, reference to a public meeting and official opening on 15th
January 2018;
Update requested on Expert Advisory Group on proposed amalgamation of Galway City
and County Councils;
Update regarding Tourist Office; Mr. B. McGrath advised that his understanding was that
the proposed sale by Fåilte Ireland has been agreed in principle and that further to Notice
of Motion submitted the sale would not proceed without Council being updated;
Reference to Budgetary process and queries regarding works to complete Shop Street and
surrounds. Mr. B. McGrath gave a detailed update on the programme of works;
Request for update on Notice of motion in relation to requesting deployment of Gardai for
traffic management duties at Parkmore Business Park. It was confirmed that the Gardai
indicated they were not in a position to positively respond to the Notice of Motion. Mr. B.
McGrath referenced works carried out at Parkmore that were delivered ahead of
2
schedule. He advised that the Galway City Ring Road is a major part of the solution to
alieving traffic congestion in the City, including Parkmore;
Update regarding commitment to arrange a meeting of the Inter Agency Group for
Traveller Accommodation by the end of November. Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services
confirmed that it was hoped that the group would be in situ by month end which will assist
in the delivery of the Traveller Accommodation Programme objectives;
Update regarding contact with Gardai relating to instances of anti-social behaviour;
Request for details of discussions held in relation to use of Airport site;
Request for a Graffiti policy to include actions to deal with anti-hate and racist graffiti;
request to clean graffiti under the bridge on the Dyke Road;
Details requested regarding bonfire clean ups in the City;
Reference to the successful Macnas parade and a discussion in relation to cleaning rotas
over the Bank Holiday weekend. A number of Councillors complimented the good work of
the Litter Management Unit;
Update on Corrib Great Southern site;
The cleaning and painting works on the Salmon Weir Bridge were complimented;
Request for details of expenditure on housing adaptation grants and extensions for
persons with disabilities in 2017;
Query whether any proposed halting site areas have been identified in Galway City;
Request for playground repair works timeline and if new fixture will be added to Renmore
playground before Christmas;
Request for an update on site for a new burial ground.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to the Council's updated policy pursuant to Section 183 of the
Local Government Act relating to disposal of lands owned by Galway City Council and
suggested that the policy agreed is that any proposed newspaper advertisement could be
considered and decided upon by the full Council. This was confirmed by the Chief Executive,
Mr. McGrath.
Cllr. B. Cameron requested to re-submit his Motion regarding the request for favourable
terms for disabled tenants under Tenant Purchase Schemes and this was seconded by Cllr. T.
O' Flaherty. Adiscussion was held and Cllr. C. Connolly referred to national policy on retaining
units designated for disability and for the elderly in local authority ownership for these
specific needs. Mr. B. McGrath agreed and confirmed that this was the national policy. The
Mayor proceeded to take a Vote on the Motion:
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
"Recognising that the present Tenant Purchase Scheme mitigated against people with
Disabilities, Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Housing when introducing future
Tenant Purchase Schemes to positively discriminate with favourable terms and special
conditions for Disabled Tenants"
In Favour: 16
Against: 1 Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
3
Cllr. B. Cameron referred to Notice of Motion 23/16 that he submitted on 3rd October 2016
which was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty where "he called on the Chief Executive to earmark
and designate the 1.4 acre site in the Westside as a Cultural and Artistic hub to cater for a mix
of organisations specialising with children and youth". Mr. Cameron advised that following
the good news of the Lenaboy artistic hub he requested removal of this Motion.
Replies were issued on matters arising by Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive, Mr. T. Connell,
Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services and Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of
Services.
Clarification
A synopsis of Clarifications arising raised by Councillors were:
Works at Cappagh Park and information sharing;
Ballinfoile Community Centre opening times, availability and staffing;
Detail on clean up of sites after bonfire night;
Request for 24 hour security at the Corrib Great Southern site;
Query as to whether there were cutbacks on number of staff in the Litter Management
Unit working over the October Bank Holiday weekend;
Reference to Galway City Ring Road and delay in submission to An Bord Pleanåla.
Replies were issued on matters of clarification by Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive and Mr. D.
Flood, A/Senior Executive Engineer.
Cllr P. Conneely requested to say a few words of tribute to the former Taoiseach Liam
Cosgrave, RIP. Cllr. Conneely described his many attributes and his friendship with Mr.
Cosgrave and his connection with Galway. Mayor Flannery supported Cllr. P. Conneely's
comments.
Cllr. F. Fahy referenced €100,000 in the 2017 Budget for Ballinfoile Castlegar Community
Centre and he requested that €30,000 be ring fenced for maintenance costs in 2018. He
proceeded to submit a Motion in writing to the Mayor "That the funding for Ballinfoile
Castlegar Community Centre from the 2017 Budget be carried forward to 2018 to ensure that
equipment is purchased for the Community Centre". This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
The Chief Executive advised that this matter could be raised at the Statutory Budget Meeting
scheduled on the 20th November 2017.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to the Expert Advisory Group and proceeded to submit a Notice of
Motion requesting their attendance in Galway City Council to make a presentation to the
Council. This was seconded by Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir. Mr. B. McGrath advised that the Advisory
Group had met with Council Members in September and that another opportunity will be
afforded to Members to meet with the Group. Mr. McGrath declared that he was nominated
to be a Member of the Advisory Group and that the Terms of Reference required the Group
to report to the Minister. Mayor Flannery proceeded to take a Vote on the Motion:
4
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Seconded:
"That Galway City Council calls on the Department of Housing, Planning and Local
Government Expert Advisory Group to make a presentation to Galway City Council on the
proposed amalgamation of the City and County Councils".
In Favour: 7
Against: 8
Abstain: 3
The Motion was defeated
Cllr. O. Crowe submitted a Motion in writing to the Mayor to request Minister Ross to attend
Galway City Council regarding the Galway City Ring Road and the downgrading of Galway Port
to a Tier 3 Port. The Mayor seconded the Motion and proceeded to read out same and then
took a Vote:
Proposed: Cllr. O. Crowe
Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
"That Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross
TD, to visit this Council to address the elected members on the Government's intentions
with regard to the Galway City Ring-Road and funding structures associated therewith and
further to explain to this Local Authority the rationale for Downgrading Galway Port to a
Tier 3 Port and the negative consequences this will have from a funding perspective.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: 2
The Motion was passed.
The Minutes were adopted.
2.
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
S183 Local Government Act 2001 - Granting of Temporary leasehold on Lands at
Galway Airport Carnmore, Co Galway to Galway Flying Club Ltd.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed the granting of temporary leasehold on lands at Galway Airport
Carnmore, Co Galway to Galway Flying Club Ltd for a period of one year. This Motion was
seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan.
Cllr. P. Keane proposed an amendment that the Flying Club lease be extended to a 3 year
period. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe.
A discussion was held regarding the motions submitted including issue of access to the 115
acre facility, vehicles being parking across the road from the facility and health and safety
issues, use of lands for agricultural purposes such as grazing, maintenance of the runway and
potential future use of the site for domestic flights to Dublin and elsewhere, legal implications
of changing the lease term, tendering process for the use of two hangers for TV and film
production, equipment at the facility, security and maintenance costs, the potential use of
the site as an economic brown field site, income and expenditure on the site, potential use of
5
the site for large outdoor events for the Galway 2020 programme, possible loss of aviation to
Galway City if the site is not retained for current use. It was confirmed that Galway County
Council manage the buildings and site on behalf of the City Council. A number of Councillors
expressed compliments to the executive of the Council regarding the prudent decision to
purchase the said lands.
Mayor Flannery proceeded to read out the motions and take a Vote on same:
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane
Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
"S183 Local Government Act 2001 - That Galway City Council in conjunction with its sister
Authority in Galway County Council would grant a 3 year lease/licence to Galway Flying
Club in the interest of giving Galway Flying Club a more secure tenure on the site".
In Favour: 3 Against: 14 Abstain: 1
Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
"S183 Local Government Act 2001 - Proposal for the Granting of Temporary leasehold on
Lands at Galway Airport, Carnmore, Co Galway to Galway Flying Club Ltd — Per Report
circulated for a 1 year period".
In Favour: 18 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 18
The Motion was passed unanimously.
3.
(b)
(c)
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 18th October, 2017
Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 7th November, 2017
Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 10th November, 2017
Mayor Flannery referred to Reports of Committee Meetings as next item on the Agenda. Cllr.
C. Connolly requested that CPG Budget Meeting dates be circulated to Councillors who do not
sit on the CPG. Cllr. M. Crowe proposed that Corporate Policy Group Reports Items 3 (a), (b)
and (c) be noted. This was seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron. A Vote was taken on the matter.
6
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"Reports from Corporate Policy Group Meetings of 18th October, 7th & 10th November, 2017
be noted"
In Favour: 12 Against: 3 Abstain: 2
Present: 17
The Motion was agreed. Items 3 (a), (b) & (c) were noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
European Capital of Culture, 2020 - To Receive Presentation.
Ms. H. Kiely, CEO Galway 2020 gave a detailed presentation on Galway 2020, the concept,
themes, progress, board of Directors, mission, programme update, projects underway and
upcoming, key milestone agreed for 2020.
A detailed discussion then took place with contributions, queries and requests for clarification
received by Cllrs. F. Fahy, M. Cubbard, M. Farrell, M. Lohan, C. Ö' Conchüir, T. O' Flaherty, D.
McDonnell, D. Lyons, N. Larkin, B. Cameron, P. Conneely, N. McNelis, C. Connolly, O. Crowe,
J. Walsh and Mayor P. Flannery.
At 7.25 p.m. an extension of time of the meeting was suggested by the Mayor. This
extension of time was formally proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell and agreed.
The asset of Galway's waterways was discussed by Councillors. Cllr. T. O' Flaherty proceeded
to submit a Notice of Motion in writing to Mayor Flannery. This was seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell. Mayor Flannery proceeded to read the Motion and called a Vote on same.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"l call on the Galway 2020 European Capital of Culture Committee to include the
waterways in the City in the 2020 Capital of Culture Programme".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: 1
The Motion was passed.
7
Present: 16
Mayor Flannery suggested that a Special Meeting of the Council be convened on 20th
November at Ila.m. to deal with remaining Agenda Items. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'
Flaherty and the Mayor proceeded to take a Vote on the matter.
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Flannery
"A Special Meeting be convened on 20th November at Ila.m. to deal with Agenda Items"
In Favour: 9 Against: 7 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
Submission under Draft National Planning Framework
Deferred.
Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th September 2017
(i) Environment;
(ii) Recreation & Amenity;
(iii) Transportation;
(iv) Housing;
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development.
Items 4c (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) were deferred.
Chief Executive's Report for September 2017
Deferred.
Chief Executive's Report for October 2017
Deferred.
Chief Executive's Report for November 2017
Deferred.
To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17
Deferred.
Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway
Deferred
BREXIT
(i) Impacts / preparation / planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government — Report circulated April
2017.
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from
Brexit — Report circulated September 2017.
(iii) The view from Irish Local Government — Report circulated October 2017.
Items 4i (i), (ii) & (iii) were deferred.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
8
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
NOM 01/ 17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr D. McDonnell
3rd January 2017
"l hereby propose that a variation of the City Development Plan is initiated forthwith to
provide for the re-zoning of lands of 1.2 acres at Greenfields, Newcastle, in the ownership
of Rory Rogers c/o McCarthy Keville O'Sullivan, block 1, Financial Services Building,
Moneenagheisha Road, Galway. The proposed variation is in the interest of proper planning
and sustainable development and having regard to the housing crisis that currently exists
in Galway City."
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We
call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
NOM 3/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. J. Walsh
25th January, 2017
"l am calling on Galway City Council to expedite the preparation of the Draft Local Area Plan
for Ardaun. These lands have been identified as one of the major urban housing delivery sites
with a potential yield of 500 units in the medium term subject to progress on the Local Area
Plan".
NOM 4/17
Notice given by:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
9
Date Received:
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hEireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil no ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun
cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland
and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
NOM 11/17
Notice given by:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
10
Date Received:
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the
full Council for consideration
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing
a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to
air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This
should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs
to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment
from taxpayer money".
NOM 20/17 Notice given by:
Cllr. M. Lohan
20th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"The heritage of our city is unique and diverse with both urban, rural and waterfront beauty
within our borders. Coolough Village, above the banks of the Corrib, is a bucolic oasis within
Galway City. The old roads, boreens and pathways are now a nature wonderland and an
idyllic and vital historical reminder of our past. Galway City Council commends the area
residents for their combined work in maintaining and cleaning the boreens. The use of this
rustic jewel in Heritage Week walks and their continued use by residents enhances the life of
our city. It is essential that the boreens are protected and cared for so that future generations
can continue to use and enjoy this unique amenity. This City Council supports the residents
as they work with Heritage Ireland and other agencies to preserve, protect and enhance
Coolough and its environs."
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
11
Date Received:
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
NOM 23/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
10th April, 2017
That Galway City Council meeting includes in the Galway Transportation Strategy Light Rail as
a possible solution to the traffic chaos in Galway city.
6. QUESTIONS
QI/17
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
February, 2017.
Can I please have an update on the water Safety Audit for Galway City that was requested
over 12 months ago. When will it be published, distributed. What are the plans for it. Who
is the point of contact that will be working to deliver safety works. What is/has been the
delay in getting the audit done. Who is in charge of audit in City Hall.
This has been a very sad year again for the amount of persons who have entered the water
across the city, I have been working with a number of groups who are trying to put in place a
system to recover victims quicker. The next step is prevention.
Item 6. Deferred.
7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations .
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower.
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017.
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway. Further reply to
issue.
Email from C. O'Connor, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 4th August 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and
County Council.
12
(g)
Letter from Mr. Brendan Holland on behalf of Galway City Business Association and
Eyre Square All Ireland Screen Committee.
Letter from M. Cleary, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Offaly County
Council dated 19th September 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Offaly County Council.
Letter from T. O'Callaghan, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 5th October 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City &
County Council.
Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 6th November 2017 Re: Rugby World Cup 2023 —
Ireland Bid.
Items 7 (a) to (i) deferred.
8.
CONFERENCES
Attendance at conferences were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy
and agreed by all present.
1)
2)
3)
4)
Title: Celtic Conferences — Audit Committees in the Irish Local Government System
Date: -3rd December 2017
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. M. Crowe
Title: Celtic Conferences — A Practical Guide to Budget 2018
Date: 8th — 10th December 2017
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. M. Crowe
Title: Celtic Conferences — ODCE/Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement
Date: 21st - 23rd December 2017
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Title: ACE Management & Training — Excel Training for Councillors on Cashflow and
Budget Spreadsheets
Date: 13th & 14th December 2017
Venue: Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. M. Crowe
Approved Training
1)
Title: AILG Training National Public Library Strategy 2018
Date: 21st October 2017
Venue: Landmark Hotel, Carrick-on-Shannon
13
- 2022
2)
3)
4)
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. J. Walsh, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. P.
Conneely.
Title: The Institute of Professional Training — 'Housing in Crisis' Defining the Role of the
Councillor
Date: 10th 11th & 12th November 2017
Venue: Clayton Whites Hotel, Wexford
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. P. Conneely & Cllr. M. Lohan
Title: IPl Planning Week — South Dublin County Council Planning Conference
Date: 9th November 2017
Venue: Tallaght Stadium, Tallaght, Dublin 24.
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. P. Conneely
Title: AILG — Weather Emergencies & Local Authorities
Date: 23rd November 2017
Venue: Shirley Arms Hotel, Carrickmacross, Co. Monaghan
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. J. Walsh, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. D. McDonnell & Cllr. F. Fahy
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Kenneth Grealish (RIP)
Mr. Pat O'Grady (RIP)
Mr. Harry Murray (RIP)
Mr. John Corcoran (RIP)
Ms. Ann Vaughan (RIP)
Mr. John F. Bourke (RIP)
Votes of Congratulations:
Congratulations to Mr. Bernard Mulkerrins on his retirement from Galway City Council.
Congratulations to Galway Golf Club Senior Cup Team and Management on placing 2nd in the
European Club Golf Championship.
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
14
A discussion took place on training for Councillors relevant to their role. The Chief Executive
clarified the procedure advising that training approved must have regard to benefits likely to
accrue, the general interests of the administrative area and local community and outline the
total cost. The Mayor proceeded to take a Vote on the matter.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
"That Further Educational training be included in the Conference budget"
In Favour: 16
Against: O
Abstain: O
Present:
ignec
16
The Motion was passed.
The meeting ended at 8.00 p.m.
Min tes, Confirme
Mayor of Galway
15
