Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held in the Galmont Hotel,
Lough Atalia and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 13th December, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; E. Hoare; P. Keane & M. O'Connor
Councillors: I. Byrne; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; N. Larkin;
D. Lyons; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis, N. Murphy
& T. O'Flaherty
Councillor: C. Higgins
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
E. Finan, A/Administrative Officer
Ms.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
. P. Greene, Director of Services
Ms.
P. Philbin, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Smyth, Head of Finance
Mr.
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
Ms.
Mr.
D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Cormican, Executive Engineer
Mr. G. McMahon, Arts Officer
Ms. A. Finn, Administrative Officer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Mr. J. Seymour, National Transport Authority (NTA)
Mr. J. Rooney, NTA
Mr. J. Grogan, NTA
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order
their consideration.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator welcomed all and commenced with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting and suggested that the meeting proceed until
6.30pm with a break at 4.50pm to ventilate the room. This was agreed.
Minutes, Confirmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th November 2021 and adjournment meeting held
on 15th November 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising on the minutes individually for the
two dates of the meeting:
8th November 2021
No matters of accuracy. Under matters arising the following was raised:
Cllr. M. Cubbard stated he was absent at the start of the meeting due to technical issues on zoom and
requested that this be noted after the Roll Call Vote. This was noted.
Cllr. J. Connolly referred to NOM 24/2021 which was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare on page 5 of the
minutes that 'Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.' He advised that
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty had initially seconded the motion and then withdrew her seconding of same. Cllr. J.
Connolly advised that he felt this matter was not debated and asked if the matter has been examined.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that he will examine the proposal.
Cllr. J. Connolly referred to page 4 on the minutes where he requested the consideration of a Motion
that UGalway City Council's Housing SPC review the scheme of letting priorities to assess if flexibility
can be applied to allow families currently only considered for a two-bed property to express a
preference for inclusion on the three-bedroom list". Cllr. J. Connolly advised that he believed the
motion should not have been ruled out of order.
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO advised that the Scheme of Letting Priorities must be in compliance with the
Housing Regulations, 2011. He added that the proposal from Cllr. J. Connolly will be considered under
the Choice Based Letting Scheme to facilitate a qualification criteria for a three bed property in certain
circumstances.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to a motion that he proposed on page 4 which was seconded by Cllr. N.
McNelis. The minute recorded Cllr. D. Lyons as the proposer. This was noted for correction.
15th November 2021
No matters of accuracy. Under matters arising, Cllr. M. Cubbard and Cllr. A. Cheevers referred to
upgrades to tennis courts on page 10 requesting a verbal update on same.
Mr. P. Greene, DOS and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries.
Mayor C. Connolly referFéWto page 9 and requested an update on the Lough Corrib Navigation
Trustees.
2
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that the enabling legislative basis to underpin the functions and
activities of the Lough Corrib Navigation Trustees that it is his understanding that a proposal will come
before the Houses of the Oireachtas prior to summer 2022.
Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 8th November 2021 and adjournment meeting held
on the 15th November 2021.
Minutes of 8th November Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Minutes of 15th November: Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
I(b) Budget Meeting, 22nd November, 2021
Mayor C. Connolly invited matters of accuracy and matters arising.
Under matters arising Cllr. J. Connolly advised that he had referred to the 175 years since the Great
Famine, asking if this and the centenary of the death of Liam Mellows will be commemorated by events
organised by the City Council next year.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive welcomed the proposed commemorations and confirmed that the
Heritage Office and the Galway City Council Museum will come back to the Council in 2022 with
proposed details of commemorative activities.
Cllr. N. McNelis queried if Council meetings are recorded. It was confirmed that they are not recorded.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to agenda Item No. 4(g) - Galway City Sports Club Grant Scheme 2021
advising that a Report regarding same had not been circulated.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive informed the meeting that the examination of grant applications is in
accordance with the marking scheme and that the grants will be processed this week. Councillors and
clubs will be informed of the grant awards in the coming week. The Agenda item may be carried forward
to the January 2022 Agenda for noting.
Proposed by: Cllr. C Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Minutes of Budget Meeting, 22nd November, 2021
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Mayor C. Connolly referred Members to agenda item 2(a).
2(a) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of properties by
Approved Housing Bodies
3
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Service gave an update on the number of properties proposed for acquisition
by the various Approved Housing Bodies.
Councillors discussed the Report circulated and matters raised included costs, value for money,
homelessness and emergency accommodation, number of valuations sought, the funding mechanism
and payment of management service charges.
Ms. P. Philbin, DOS and Mr. D. Mahon, SEO responded to queries and clarifications raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
2(a) Report Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of 8 no.
Approved Housing Body CAS acquisitions by Approved Housing Bodies to the value of
€2,321,048 — per report circulated 8th December 2021 namely: 7 Mulvoy Place; 4 Newcastle
Court; 53 Cluain Riocaird; 190 Coill Tire; 123 An Cimin M6r; 104a Laurel Park; 5 Durabhån &
Ballybane more.
This was agreed and approved.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to Item 2(b) and 2(c) to be considered together. This was agreed.
2(b) Agree schedule of Special meetings for the draft City Development Plan 2023-2029
2(c) Proposed Dates for City Development Plan meetings: Monday 10th January at 3pm &
Wednesday 12th January at 4pm.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
2(b) Agreed schedule of Special meetings for the draft City Development Plan 2023-2029
2(c) Agreed Dates for City Development Plan meetings: Monday 10th January at 3pm &
Wednesday 12th January at 4pm.
The dates as listed on the agenda were agreed and adopted.
It was noted that a third meeting may be required and this may be considered by Council by way of
an adjournment of the 12th January, 2022 meeting.
2(d) Ordinary Council meeting to be changed from Monday 10th January to Monday 24th January at
3pm.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
(d) Ordinary Council meeting to be changed from Monday 10th January to Monday 24th
January at 3pm.
This was agreed and approved.
4
2(e) Three Year Capital Programme 2021 - 2023
Mayor C. Connolly proposed the deferral of agenda item 2(e) for consideration on the January
Agenda.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
To defer the consideration of agenda item 2(e) Three Year Capital Programme 2021 - 2023 to
the January agenda.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. N. Murphy
& Cllr. M. O'Connor
Against: Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 11 Against: 5 Abstain: O Present: 16
The deferral of agenda item 2(e) to the January Council Meeting agenda was approved.
Mayor C. Connolly referred to the Supplementary agenda item 2(a) that issued to Council.
Supplementary Agenda Item 2 (a) Section 183 Disposal of land/premises by way of lease, at
Carnmore, Co. Galway.
Councillors discussed the Report.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Approval of Section 183 Disposal of land/premises by way of lease for a period of one year to
the lease Galway Flying Club Ltd., at Carnmore, Co. Galway per Report issued 30th November
2021.
This was agreed and approved.
Cllr. D McDonnell queried if there was a difficulty in issuing a three year lease instead of a one year
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive outlined that a one year lease is proposed similar to what will be
considered by Galway County Council.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group of Friday, 12th November 2021
Mayor C. Connolly referred to the report under agenda item 3(a). This was noted by Council.
5
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Update on Proposed Temporary Cycle Lane in Salthill
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer referred to documentation distributed to Councillors and gave a verbal
update on the proposed temporary cycle lane in Salthill. He outlined the two options, Option 1 — One-
way traffic with a 3m wide two-way cycle facility with min 0.5m buffer and Option 2 — Two-way traffic
with a 3m wide two - way cycle facility with localised pinch points and 0.23m buffer. He confirmed
that this is a temporary cycleway for a period of 6 months and that it is proposed to seek COVID-19
funding for the project. He advised that it is proposed to proceed to public consultation in the New
Year and be operational from March to September 2022.
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer gave a presentation of the assessment taken on-site of existing
infrastructure along the R336 Blackrock to Barna Road; Ladies Beach and the general Salthill area. He
displayed images of feasible and possible examples of works that could be considered to facilitate the
cycleway.
At 4.37pm, Mayor C. Connolly proposed a break for 15 minutes. This was agreed and the meeting
reconvened at 5pm.
Councillors discussed the documentation and presentation and individually expressed their views
both in favour and against the proposals.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer responded to queries raised and made reference to the design standards
and referred to options within the cycle design manual and that the preferable option will be subject
to road safety audit. He confirmed that the proposed removal of disabled parking on the southern
carriageway will be relocated to an alternative location. He confirmed that the non-statutory public
consultation will be under Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act and that a Road Safety Audit will be
conducted. Furthermore, he also confirmed that the emergency services will be consulted. Any
required amendment to Byelaws, necessary to implement the proposed cycleway, will run in tandem
with the ongoing design process.
Other matters raised by Councillors included: potential impact to businesses in the area; lack of time
for consultation and the period of time for same; potentially more displacement of parking into
residential areas; the loss of car spaces under Option 2; reference to page 8 of the circulated report
that two thirds of parking would be removed; reservations regarding impacts on disability parking and
access; potential delays with public transport, including buses, and journey times; effect on public
transport to Connemara; query on time and cost spent on the project to date; funding source;
proposals after 6 months in reversing same; are raised cycle lanes subject to planning; 220 car parking
spaces in Salthill; schools on Threadneedle Road and Dr. Mannix Road; the effects the proposal would
have on the elderly; request for consultation with the year-round sea swimming community; request
for online or in person engagement; usage of route currently by cyclists; footfall at Blackrock and
Ladies Beach; detail from traffic survey and when was it conducted and completed; concerns were
raised regarding traffic flows between Blackrock to Knocknacarra cross; Pollnarooma; Theadneedle
Road; Councillors were not asked to vote on the time frame of 6 months at the 11th October Council
meeting; dangers to cyclists and the opportunity to become a positive inclusive city.
6
Mr. U. Finn advised that all costs in relation to staff time spent on this project to date are covered by
the NTA grant for project team staffing. However, the reallocation of staff time to this temporary
project is impacting on other similar projects within the GTS. Alternative bus stops will have to be
assigned/ moved. Byelaws may need to be brought forward for taxi ranks. A further update will be
brought to Council at the February Council meeting.
The public consultation will be placed on Galway City Council's website. Mr. Finn confirmed that there
currently is no right turn from Kingston onto Threadneedle Road.
Cllr. P. Keane suggested that the public consultation should include a question asking the public if they
wish to object to either of the proposed Option I or Option 2.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer responded to further clarifications raised and advised that the
consultation is to get the publics views to help improve and tailor the project.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive confirmed that following the Council's decision to implement a
temporary trial cycle lane that a non-statutory consultation under Section 38 of the Road Traffic Acts
will proceed with the two proposed options outlined.
Mayor C. Connolly raised a Motion submitted by Cllr. McNelis under Standing Order 34 for the
purposes of dealing with urgent business as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Supported by: Cllrs. E. Hoare; O. Hanley; D. McDonnell; T. O'Flaherty; F. Fahy; D. Lyons; N. Murphy;
M. O'Connor & M. Cubbard
That the Galway City Council supports the Irish Local Development Network (ILDN) and the trade
unions, SIPTU & Forsa, in their opposition to the new model of employment services outlined in
Pathways to Work which proposes to terminate current Job Clubs and Local Employment Services
(LES) by mid 2022 and to replace the successful 25-year-old community-led and non-profit
providers with an untested, unproven centralised profit-driven model of delivery.
The Council rejects the privatisation of employment services and the move towards a system that
monetises those most disadvantaged. This approach would impact most adversely those who have
become unemployed during the COVID-19 pandemic, lone parents, people with disabilities,
migrants and the underemployed — all of whom really need access to the type of walk-in, person-
centred, community-based employment service with the wrap-around supports that such services
provide.
The Council further notes that the new model proposed in Pathways to Work will lead to job losses
for a whole body of skilled personnel who have developed significant knowledge and expertise in
assisting those more vulnerable members of our society to enhance their life outcomes and
progress to employment. The Council notes that the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Social
Protection, Community and Rural Development and the Islands, stated in its pre-Budget Submission
(2021) that Local Employment Services "should be retained in their current model" and that this
submission was supported by members of all Parties. The Council supports the calls on the Minister
for Social Protection to immediately halt the process for the rollout of the New Regional
7
Employment Services, pending the establishment of a working group made up of all stakeholders to
review the current process and outcomes.
The Council requests that this motion be sent to the Minister for Social Protection on adoption.
This was agreed and adopted.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence was noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
(a) Correspondence dated 16th November 2021 received from Sligo County Council.
(b) Correspondence dated 25th November 2021 received from Waterford City & County
Council.
(c) Correspondence dated 29th November 2021 received from Galway County Council.
(d) Correspondence dated 2nd December 2021 received from David Minton, NWRA —
Offshore Renewable Electricity Support Scheme.
(e) Correspondence dated 3rd December 2021 received from Department of Housing,
Local Government & Heritage — Local Authority Housing Delivery Action Plans
4(b) Galway City Council Digital Strategy - circulated 11th June 2021. Not Considered
circulated 9th September 2021. Not
4(c) Urban Regeneration Development Fund (URDF) -
Considered
4(d) Schools' Street Pilot Recommendations - circulated 8th September 2021. Not Considered
4(e) National Development Plan 2021 - 2030 - circulated October 2021. Not Considered
4(f) Chief Executive's Report: Not Considered
November 2021 - circulated November 2021.
ii. December 2021 — circulated December 2021
4(g) Galway City Council Sports Club Grants 2021 and the Minority Sports & Physical Activity
Grants 2021 - Agenda item to be carried forward to the January 2022 Agenda for noting.
4(h) Draft Protocol for the flying of flags from Civic Buildings - Not Considered
8
9. CONFERENCES
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
That conferences be approved. This was agreed.
Conferences:
(a) Title: Celtic Conferences — The Finance Act 2021
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Date: 7th 8th & 9th January 2021
Cllr. E. Hoare was approved to attend.
(b) Title: Celtic Conferences — Housing for all how will it help people find homes?
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Date: 21st 22nd & 23rd January 2021
(c) Title: Social Media Dublin
Venue: Croke Park, Dublin
Date: 26th January 2021
(d) Title: Irelands Housing Conference
Venue: Radisson Blu Royal, Dublin
Date: 2nd February 2021
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations were approved.
Vote of Sympathy
• Ray McLoughlin, R.I.P.
Mayor C. Connolly expressed her thanks to the City Council staff during a difficult year and gave a
greeting to all 'Nollaig shona agus athbhliain faoi mhaise'.
CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Global Mayors Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy - Agreed at November meeting to list as
a separate Agenda item. Not Considered
9
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce legislation to impose levies
on homes that are purchased as investment properties.
It was agreed at the Annual Budget meeting to carry this proposal to the December Council
agenda
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Reply issued with Agenda 08.12.21
NOM 18/2021 also submitted under SO 34 at Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
10
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and
Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water
Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works
together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently
being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its
own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not considered.
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not Considered
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and
in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission
from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal
quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered
11
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021 - Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
• Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily
off the road due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of
their condition.
• Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not Considered
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic
Act 2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-
keeping with a cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall
be presented as standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
Reply issued to Council 9th November 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the
use of automated signage.
Not Considered
NOM 33/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 22nd June 2021
Galway City Council acknowledges the need for a new national maternity hospital (NMH)
to provide the highest quality healthcare in Dublin, and across Ireland. Galway City Council
notes the lack of legal clarity regarding the ownership and management of the hospital,
and also acknowledges the concerns regarding the employment rights of those who will
work in the hospital.
Galway City Council agrees to write to the Minister for Health to call for the proposed new
publicly-funded NMH to be constructed on land owned by the State; and that, to guarantee
its secular ethos, the new facility be fully owned and governed by the State. If this motion
is passed it is agreed that this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities.
Not Considered
NOM 35/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 5th July 2021
That this Council again calls on the NTA to provide a bus route for Upr. Ballymoneen Road
and engage with operators to deliver same. With two new developments built by City
Council and a third to seek plannin and also a new school, it is important that public
12
transport be made available for residents. It is not appropriate to expect residents to walk
to Western Distributor Road as this does not promote use of public transport.
A copy of this motion to be sent to Minister for Transport.
Not Considered
NOM 40/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 4th October 2021
I propose that Galway City Council supports this motion which is calling on Government to
deliver a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022.
The pandemic has shown us just how crucial Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) is
for parents, children and the economy. However, the sector is in crisis. Low levels of
government investment and a broken funding system have resulted in poverty pay for
professionals, high fees for parents and high staff turnover as services struggle to recruit
and retain workers. This approach is undermining quality for children.
• Irish Government investment in the Early Years Sector lags far behind other
European Countries.
• Irish parents pay the highest fees in Europe the average weekly fee for full-time
childcare is €186.
• The average hourly pay for Early Years Educators is €11.91.
• The average staff turnover is 40% in full day services per year.
In Budget 2022, the Government can start the transformation of ECEC by increasing
investment and implementing a new funding model so educators are paid a decent wage,
childcare is affordable for parents and these essential services are sustainable into the
future.
I call on Galway City Council to support a New Deal for Early Years in Budget 2022, and in
doing so I propose that a letter is sent on behalf of Galway City Council to both Minister
O'Gorman and Minister McGrath asking them both to support a new deal for Early Years
by increasing Government investment in Budget 2022 in order to deliver quality care and
education for our children, our workers, parents and providers.
Not Considered
NOM 41/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 2nd October 2021
The Irish Society for Colitis & Crohn's Disease is a patient-to-patient support group for
over 40,000 people who are living with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) in Ireland.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease describes a group of conditions in which the intestines
become inflamed. The two most common inflammatory bowel diseases are Crohn's
disease and ulcerative colitis.
Living with IBD can be a daily struggle, traveling outside the home has always been a
challenge for many people living with IBD. The Irish Society for Colitis and Crohn's Disease
is calling on all County Councils and the Department of Health to recognise our "No
Waiting ' card, to support people in the community with IBD gaining urgent access to a
nearby toilet.
Not Considered
13
NOM 43/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 28th October 2021
That Galway City Council will ensure that apprenticeships are facilitated in any public
infrastructure project that Galway City Council is leading and/or collaborating with another
agency such as the Land Development Agency to deliver. This policy will be in-line with the
Council's Strategic Workforce Planning Framework, relevant EU directives as well as
procurement and tendering regulations to achieve social dividends.
Not Considered
NOM 44/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd November 2021
The Grave of 19th Century artist and Galway City native Joseph Patrick Haverty remains
unmarked at Glasnevin Cemetery. I propose that Galway City Council would undertake the
appropriate work to mark the Grave with HavertVs name and the location of his birth.
Not Considered
NOM 45/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 29th November 2021
Following the receipt in recent days by Galway City Council of the fines due and owing for
the years 2020 and 2021 pursuant to the Derelict Sites legislation from the owners of the
property comprising the former Corrib Great Southern Hotel, this Council resolves to ring-
fence the sum of €400,000 (four hundred thousand euro) to be allocated to the delivery of
projects earmarked by Council for the Galway City East Local Electoral Area.
Not Considered
6. QUESTIONS
Question 21/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 26th September 2021
Following the publication of the Night-Time Economy Taskforce recommendations will the
Council make provision for a Night-Time Economy Advisor in Draft Budget 2022 as well
progressing a Night-Time Economy committee? And is there scope to carry forward or
prevail of any potential underspend in festival funding this year arising from public health
restrictions, such as the 70,000 allocated to St. Patricks' Day 2021, to plan and fund an
expanded St. Patricks' Day 2022 with additional night-time activities or otherwise offer
support to the night-time economy in 2022
Not Considered.
Question 25/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. Murphy
Date Received: 18th November 2021
Regarding the proposed design of one-way traffic system to allow for a two-way cycle lane
on the Salthill Prom, which has been designed to avoid any hard engineering. Is hard
engineering being avoided because this is a Section 38 or because the design is temporary
or for some other reason? Sections 38 submissions are being used for many other projects
in Galway where the road width is being altered, for example, the Clybaun road. Temporary
hard engineering changes have been made in a number of locations in Salthill where the
footpath has been extended to allow for outdoor dining, and they have been designed as
temporary kerbing changes that can be removed later. So I require clarity on why the
Salthill Prom is different to these other projects
Reply issued with Agenda 08.12.21.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The Meeting ended at 18.24 pm
15
