Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14th January 2019
at 2.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, M.
Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh.
T. Connell, Director of Services/ Acting Chief Executive
D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
C. Phelan, A/ Director of Services
Ms.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
S. Carroll, Administrative Officer
Ms.
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
Councillor N. Larkin
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with
Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Mayor wished all a Happy New Year, and proposed that the meeting would finish at 6.00pm. This was
agreed.
The Mayor advised of Mr. B. McGrath's apologies, due to the passing of his brother-in -law. The Mayor
extended his sympathies on behalf of the Council.
The Mayor proposed to cover Item 1 - Confirmation of Minutes; Item 3 — Reports of Committee Meetings; and
Item 5 - Notices of Motion at this meeting.
The Mayor proposed to defer items 4b, 4c, 4f, 4g, 4j and 4k (noted as 4j in error on the agenda), until a Special
Meeting of City Council, from 2.00pm to 6.00pm on Monday the 4th of February 2019. The agenda for this
meeting would also include quarterly reports, and a workshop on the Draft RSES. This was seconded by Cllr.
F. Fahy and agreed.
Cllr M. Lohan proposed to take a discussion on Terryland Forest first. The Mayor advised that NOM 22/18
raised by Cllr. Lohan covers this item.
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
1.
Item 1 (a)
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th December 2018
Seconded: Cllr. D. Mc Donnell
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th December 2018 were
adopted.
The Mayor invited issues of accuracy, and noted that questions or items arising should be emailed to Corporate
Services.
Cllr. B. Cameron requested that minutes be updated regarding Notices of Motion appearing on the agenda to
remove those dealt with. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir. Cllr. M. Lohan advised that any Councillor
may withdraw a Notice of Motion if timely, in accordance with Standing Orders. The Mayor advised that he
would resolve the issue for the February agenda.
The Mayor advised Council that formal adoption of minutes for items 1b and lc were required.
Item 1 (b)
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 11th May 2018 — re the Conferring of
the Freedom of the City of Galway on Martin J. Walsh, Mayor of the City of Boston
Seconded: Cllr. D. Mc Donnell
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Item 1 (b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 11th May 2018 — re the Conferring of
the Freedom of the City of Galway on Martin J. Walsh, Mayor of the City of Boston were adopted.
Item 1 (c)
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 6th September 2018 — presentation
from persons seeking a nomination from Galway City Council to participate in the election for the
Office of President of Ireland.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Item 1 (c) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 6th September 2018 — presentation
from persons seeking a nomination from Galway City Council to participate in the election for the Office of
President of Ireland were adopted.
1
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Item 2 (a)
Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy (RSES) for the Northern and Western Regional
Assembly/ Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan (MASP)
The Mayor invited Ms. C. Phelan, A/ Director of Services, to give a contextual update on the Draft RSES for the
Northern and Western Regional Assembly/ Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan.
Ms. C. Phelan advised Council that the draft RSES has been at consultation stage for a ten week period since
November 2018. Planners have reviewed the substantial document, and expressed concern in terms of
content deficit in expression of the spatial hierarchy. The document at present undermines Galway's
designation under the National Spatial Strategy, and in particular there are concerns regarding the Galway
MASP, as it does not reflect the intent and status of Galway as a designated regional city under the National
Planning Framework.
Ms. C. Phelan supported the CE proposal for a workshop with Councillors for exploratory dialogue on the draft
RSES/ MASP in advance of the consultation deadline.
The Mayor thanked Ms. C. Phelan and proposed that this workshop would take place from 12.00-1.30pm on
Monday 4th February 2019. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and agreed.
A draft agenda for the workshop will be circulated by Ms. C. Phelan, with issues for discussion invited from
Councillors.
Item 2 (b)
Draft Waste Segregation Bye-Laws
Mr. D. Mahon gave a comprehensive update on the Draft Waste Segregation Bye-Laws, which cover the
segregation and storage of household and commercial waste, but do not include waste collection.
Amendments to the draft bye-laws were previously discussed by the Environment SPC, for consideration by
Council. Mr. D. Mahon advised that two submissions on the draft bye-laws had been received, as part of the
consultation process, with a third submission received from staff involved in waste management services. The
proposed commencement date for the bye-laws is the 18th February 2019.
Issues raised by Councillors included:
Concerns regarding the privatisation of waste collection; illegal dumping at bottle banks and in private
properties; use of CCTV to secure prosecutions for illegal dumping; businesses putting waste in front of
neighbouring houses; restaurant waste causing slip .hazards on paths; impacts of wind on bins and litter;
seagulls/ starlings accessing waste bags; contractual obligations of tenants of Galway City Council regarding
waste management; addressing overflowing bins on The Prom; acknowledgment of the work of the Litter
Management Unit in keeping the city clean and of work of community clean ups by Friends of Merlin Woods
and in Terryland Forest; provision of receptacles for cardboard/ plastic at bottle banks; litter fines; waivers for
waste charges; litter in parks; encouraging recycling in apartment blocks; clothes banks; election posters; and
litter in the school curriculum.
At. 2.38pm The Mayor left the meeting, and the meeting was chaired by Deputy Mayor D. Lyons. At 2.40pm,
The Mayor returned as Chair.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to issues raised. Mr. D. Mahon advised that the bye-laws do not
refer to waste collection, bottle or clothes banks. The bye-laws would strengthen the ability of the loca
authority to deal with those who could not prove they had an appropriate waste collection service in place.
2
Mr. D. Mahon advised that issues re GDPR and CCTV were under review, in order to resolve related issues. Mr.
D. Mahon directed that it would not be possible for Galway City Council to impose conditions regarding waste
collection services on a person in advance of them becoming a tenant of Galway City Council, or to refuse
tenancy on this basis. However this is a condition of the contract which the tenant signs with the local
authority. Mr. D. Mahon indicated that the tenancy handbook is currently being updated, as per item 4(e)
Estate Management Strategy for noting. Mr D. Mahon advised that the details of litter fines previously
circulated would be recirculated to members.
The Mayor requested that a copy of the existing tenancy agreement be circulated to members.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
I propose the installation of CCTV at the bottle banks on the Western Distributor Road in order to reduce
the amount of household refuse being left at the recycling banks
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
That this council meets with retailers in this city so that we can come up with a solution so that consumers
can leave unwanted packaging with the retailer.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed a motion, which was amended. The amended motion was deferred to the Special
Meeting on the 4th February 2019.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
All people allocated housing or supported for housing by Galway City Council must show proof within a
period of one month of occupancy of having a contract with a recognised waste disposal/ collection body
for the disposal of household waste prior to any allocation/ support being made.
The Motion was deferred to the 4th February 2019.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
Item 2 (b) Draft Waste Segregation Bye-Laws, with a commencement date of 18th February 2019, be
adopted.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 14
3
Item 2 (c)
Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition / construction of
properties by Approved Housing Bodies — 47 Forster Street — COPE Galway.
Mr. D. Mahon advised that Galway City Council was required to raise a loan for €2,348,045, and was now
seeking approval of Council for same.
Queries raised by Councillors included:
Current facilities and usage levels; accommodation of children and large families; acknowledgement of Cope
for their work, and of the Sisters of Mercy for their donation; legal costs; timelines; loan to Cope; and the
redress scheme.
Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries comprehensively. Mr. D. Mahon advised that this was transitional
accommodation, and Galway City Council will work with Cope and other service providers for longer term
facilities. Larger families would be accommodated if required. The new facility would not replace existing
facilities. Work commenced before Christmas 2018, with an anticipated finish in March 2020. Mr. D. Mahon
indicated that the loan to Cope was not repayable, but must be used for the purpose for which it was given,
for 30 years. The donation of the property was a gift by the Sisters of Mercy and was not part of a redress
scheme.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
Item 2 (c) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition / construction of
properties by Approved Housing Bodies — 47 Forster Street — COPE Galway.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
Item 2 (d)
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2019
Mayor Mc Nelis invited Mr. T. Connell to give background on Item 2 (d) — Annual Service Plan 2019. Mr T.
Connell indicated that the draft Annual Service Plan reflected a statutory obligation, and proposed the work
plan for 2019, taking account of the budget approved by Council. The document reflected the corporate
structures and support services. Quarterly reports would report on the progress of the plan throughout the
year.
Queries from Councillors included:
Implementation of the Estate management agreement and tenancy supports; Salthill to Silverstrand foreshore
licence; inductions for tenants and tenant handbook; modular units; development of a glycophosphate policy;
dealing with problem tenants; Rent Assessments; Corrib Park Phase 2; Derelict Sites; Urban Traffic
Management Centre; consultation with tenants; floodlighting leisure facilities; traffic over Christmas period;
Composting Facility; waste paint; staffing to deal with additional housing estates; busking bye-laws; dog
fouling and uncontrolled dogs; how motions passed are dealt with; fleet management and electric vehicles;
city speed limit review; enforcement in Slow Zone Housing Estates; Tree management Plan; Menlo Castle; and
Climate Change Action and Adaptation Plans.
Mayor Mc Nelis left the meeting at 4.00pm and Deputy Mayor, Cllr. D. Lyons, assumed the Chair. The Mayor
returned to the meeting at 4.02pm.
Mr. T. Connell responded comprehensively to Councillors queries. Mr. T. Connell advised that the small
minority of tenants who engage in anti-social behaviour are dealt with through tenancy agreements. A full
report on Såilin to Silverstrand would be issued in February. Mr. T. Connell advised that Galway City Council
4
staff are engaging in public consultation as part of the Housing Capital Programme through the planning
process and are available to meet. There is an objective to progress floodlighting of facilities where possible.
Stringent regulation applies to the composting facility with EPA licencing — the consultant's report for same is
to be reviewed. Legal advice on busking bye-laws indicates that the process must commence again, as there
is no commencement date in thé bye-law. Mr. T. Connell expressed regret that this had arisen, and informed
Members that the process would be dealt with as quickly as possible. The CE Mr. B. McGrath had previously
warned Members of proceeding with policies and amended texts without necessary scrutiny and had advised
Council at an early stage that there might be issues, which have now been clarified through the legal advice
received. Previously adopted bye-laws are not affected. The Climate Change Action and Adaptation Plans are
being prepared and will be presented to Council in due course in 2019. A speed limit review is underway, in
conjunction with the JPC. Sustainable transport options will be reviewed as part of the fleet management
policy.
Mr D. Mahon advised that health and safety and GDPR issues must be factored in when dealing with antisocial
behaviour. Galway City Council speaks with tenants and issues warnings, within the legislative process. 98
tenancy warnings were issued in 2018 for a variety of reasons e.g. breach of tenancy, not paying rent. A broad
summary of the reasons for warnings could be provided to Members, but for data protection full details could
not be circulated. Details of the number of warnings, and those that proceeded to court could be shared. Mr.
D. Mahon advised that modular units will be used by Galway City Council to address the number of people
currently in B&Bs at present. The Peter McVerry Trust have been appointed nationally to run these facilities
on the ground, as temporary facilities. Mr. D. Mahon advised members that figures on dog fouling issued in
December 2018 would be reissued to members. Mr. D. Mahon indicated that Galway City Council had recently
changed contractors to lift horses, as part of the National Framework.
Mr. U. Finn responded to Councillors queries regarding Transport and Infrastructure. Mr. U. Finn reported that
the Traffic Centre was manned at weekends before Christmas to address concerns raised by the GCBA. There
were no significant delays observed, but Officials intervened where required to clear traffic. Mr. U. Finn
advised that delays within car parks could not be observed by the Traffic Centre, only on—road delays could be
observed.
Cllr. F. Fahy requested a copy of the current tenants' handbook be circulated.
Cllr. P. Flannery proposed that before reissuing busking bye-laws, legal advice received be circulated to all
Members. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. The Mayor advised Members that legal advice was
contained in the Chief Executives Report for January.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Item 2 (d) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2019 be adopted.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
Item 2 (e)
Section 183 Disposal Notice — 302 Corrib Park
Proposed: Cllr. O.Crowe Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
Item 2 (e) Section 183 Disposal Notice — 302 Corrib Park — be adopted.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
5
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Item 3 (a)
Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 6th September 2018.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Item 3 (a) Report from Procedures Committee ofThursday 6th September 2018 was adopted.
Item 3 (b)
Report from Procedures Committee, of Thursday 10th January 2019.
Item 3 (b) was discussed. The Procedures Committee recommended that the inclusion of a prayer into
Standing Orders with the Statement of Intention should be considered by the newly elected Council in 2019.
This was discussed by Members. The recommendation was proposed by The Mayor and seconded by Cllr. O.
Crowe.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed an amendment to this proposal that a new version of the prayer be inserted into
Standing Orders with the Statement of Intention. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. The proposed prayer
was read out by Mr. G. McMahon to the Members in both English and Irish.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
A new version of the prayer be inserted into Standing Orders with the Statement of Intention.
In Favour: 5 Against: IO Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The motion was rejected.
Members voted on the substantive motion.
Proposed: The Mayor Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
The inclusion of a prayer into Standing Orders with the Statement of Intention should be considered by the
newly elected Council in 2019.
In Favour: 10 Against: 3 Abstain: 3 Present: 16
The substantive motion was adopted.
The Mayor reported on behalf of the Procedures Committee regarding the revocation of the Freedom of the
City to Aung San Suu Kyi in 2005. It was recommended by the Procedures Committee that this be considered
at the Council meeting in February 2019. This was seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely. Cllr. B. Cameron questioned
if this discussion should take place in camera, as with awarding of the Freedom of the City. The Mayor indicated
that was not the case for the revocation, as it is not dealt with in the legislation.
Mr. G. McMahon summarised the legal advice received: Section 74 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as
amended by the Reform of Local Government Act 2014) sets out the procedures for the conferral of the
freedom of an administrative area on a person or persons who, in the opinion of the Members are deserving
of that honour. The current legislation makes no reference to the deletion of a name from the roll of honour
or the reversal of a resolution to bestow the freedom of an administrative area. However, the ordinary
statutory powers granted to the Members of the City Council to make, revoke or amend resolutions with
6
regard to all of their reserved functions enables them to delete names from the Roll of Honorary Freedom of
the City if they so wish.
Galway City Council could pass a resolution to rescind the Freedom of the City and remove a named individual
from the Roll of Honorary Freedom, as per the procedure followed by Dublin City Council previously. In order
to pass the above, Council must comply with standing orders for the revocation of resolutions.
Proposed: The Mayor Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
To include the revocation of the Freedom of the City conferred on Aung San Suu Kyi in 2005 on the Agenda
for the Council Meeting in February 2019.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: 2 Present: 16
The motion was agreed.
Members discussed the recommendation of the Procedures Committee that Council meetings would start at
2.00pm and finish at 6.00pm for the remainder of the current term.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed the start time of Council meetings remain at 4pm and any change to same be
decided by the newly elected Council. Cllr. M. Farrell seconded this motion.
The Mayor advised that the Standing Orders reference a four hour meeting, but that the meeting could be
extended by agreement.
Mr. G. McMahon clarified Standing Order 6:
"The hours of the meeting shall be 4.00 pm or at such other hour as may from time to time be fixed by
resolution of the Council or by the Mayor or if the office of the Mayor is vacant or the Mayor is unable to act,
by the Deputy Mayor in consultation with the members of the Procedures Committee. The Council shall rise
not later than 7.30 p.m. When the need arises Councillors can decide to add an extension of time of a
maximum of one hour to 7.30 p.m. Where the Councillors agree to a further extension of time, a 15 minute
break shall be taken at 7.30 pm and the meeting shall conclude no later than 8.45 pm. Standing Orders shall
not be evoked to extend the meeting beyond 8.45pm." Mr. G. McMahon confirmed that the rest of the
Standing Order stands, with just the proposed start time to change.
Cllr. M. Crowe proposed an amendment to the recommendation of the Procedures Committee, with a start
time of 3pm for the remainder of Council Meetings for the current term. Cllr. M. Cubbard withdrew his motion
on the basis that a start time of 3pm be considered. The members voted on the amended motion.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
Proposal that Council meetings commence at 3pm for the remainder of the term of the current Council.
In Favour: 12 Against: 3 Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The amendment carried and became the substantive motion.
The members voted on the substantive motion.
7
Proposed: Cllr. McNelis Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
Proposal that Council meetings commence at 3.00pm and finish at 7.00pm, for the remainder of the term
of the current Council.
In Favour: 15 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 16
The substantive motion was carried.
Item 3 (c)
Proposals submitted by the Housing SPC.
The Mayor proposed two motions submitted by the Housing SPC for consideration without debate.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Farrell Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
That Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Housing Eoghan Murphy, T. D. and Minister Joe McHugh,
T.D., Department of Education, to work with NUIG and GMIT to develop a programme to provide purpose
built publicly funded student accommodation.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was carried.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
"l propose that Galway City Council contact Minister Joe McHugh, T. D. and request a review of the third
level student grant as current levels are not sufficient in supporting students when sourcing suitable
accommodation"
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was carried.
5. Notices of Motion
The Mayor proposed to take a motion in relation to Notice of Motion 17/18 and requested advice from Ms. C.
Phelan on appropriate wording of same. Members voted on the amended Motion.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
I request that the Chief Executive prepare a report pursuant to Planning Act 2018 to initiate a process to
consider a variation of the City Development Plan at land as per Motion 17/18 to allow development of
housing.
In Favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The motion was carried.
8
Cllr. D. Lyons requested clarification if 2/3rds of Council were required to pass the motion, or if a majority was
sufficient. Ms. C. Phelan advised that at this stage % of the members support was required for this stage to
prepare a report but that a simple majority was required for a resolution in any of the consequent stages in
the process of a variation.
NOM 17/18 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
9th October 2018
Date Received:
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023.
This motion relates to lands located in Renmore adjacent to Renmore Road, Galway. The purpose of this
motion is to request a variation to the zoning of 0.05 Hectares (Ha) from 'RA' (Recreation and Amenity) to 'R'
(Residential).
The subject lands extend to approximately 0.05 Ha in size and forms part of an overall site comprising approx.
0.299 Ha (See Figure 1 below). The current Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023 indicates that the site
is zoned part 'R: Residential' and part IRA: Recreational and Amenity'. The 'R' zoning designation applies to
approximately 83% of the subject site (2477 sqm) while the remaining 17% is zoned 'RA' (510 sqm). Request
and map circulated.
Cllr. D. McDonnell amended NOM 17.18 as follows on 12th November 2018. This motion was seconded by Cllr.
P. Conneely.
"l request that the Chief Executive prepare a Report pursuant to Planning Act 2018 to consider a variation of
the City Development Plan at land as per Motion 17/18 to allow development of housing."
Revised amendment 14th January 2019 agreed as follows:
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
I request that the Chief Executive prepare a report pursuant to Planning Act 2018 to initiate a process to
consider a variation of the City Development Plan at land as per Motion 17/18 to allow development of
housing.
In Favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: 1 Present: 16
The motion was carried.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received: 24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to intervene in
the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the harbour authorities".
Not considered.
Cllr. M. Lohan
NOM 2/17
Notice given by:
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister Katherine
Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have access to quality,
sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional in the sector.
9
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children during the
most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care and education.
However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to make ends meet and
providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality
childcare.
Not considered.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
NOM 4/17
Notice given by:
Date Received: 2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as regards
educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses
means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by
younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives
are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive
as possible."
Not considered.
Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
NOM 6/17
Notice given by:
Date Received: 26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar an gcinneadh a
ghlac sf deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil né ar a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile
agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not considered.
NOM 9/17
Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing so,
advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the European
Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and 2015 and
calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can continue to provide
essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over
60 years."
Not considered.
10
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western Development
Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region approach to encourage
new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches broadcast on
channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in order to allow access
for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a
unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with
significant State investment from taxpayer moneV'.
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence as a
matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na
Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisfn and Mhaoilin located on the Upper
Ballymoneen Road, Galway/'
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new criminal offence
for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators".
Not considered.
NOM 8/18
Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the HSE to review the
decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in chronic pain, outside those
experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-December status while this review is being
undertaken."
Not considered.
11
NOM 9/18
Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct hires. As
contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge it is of direct and
indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not considered.
NOM 6/18 & NOM 10/18 removed from Agenda, as per Cllr. B. Cameron's request re tidying up of NOMs.
Amended motion passed by Members at Council Meeting on 11th June 2018.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the Chinese
Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong practitioners and
other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not Considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
19th November 2018
'That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Ballinfoile Park to ascertain the
number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and bring forward plans / options to
eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates".
Not considered.
NOM 21/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
19th November 2018
"That Galway City Council inspect the sewers in Ballinfoile Park and carry out remediation work as there is an
ongoing problem for residents with overflowing sewerage"
Response issued 7th January 2019.
NOM 22/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
27th December 2018
"The Terryland Forest Park and all of our amenity spaces are vital to the quality of life, enjoyment and wellness
of all Galway citizens. Galway City Council must prioritise the maintenance and management of these
amenities and ensure that a dedicated City Council outdoor crew are provided for this purpose"
Response issued 9th January 2019.
12
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Item 4 (a)
River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-2021
The Mayor welcomed Ms. B. White, Catchments Manager — Western Region, Local Authorities Water
Programme. Ms. B. White presented a report on the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-2021,
including background, Water Framework Directive, new implementation structure, priority areas for action,
and key aims.
The Mayor thanked Ms. B. White for her presentation and invited questions from Members.
Questions from Councillors included:
Flooding; water quality in the Clare River; septic tanks; slurry spreading; maintenance of the River Corrib; and
leakage reduction.
Ms. B. White answered Councillors queries comprehensively. Ms. C. Seale, Western Community Water
Officers, advised Members that applications for funding for Waters and Communities projects were now
invited, covering infrastructure or water quality.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
That Galway City council make application to the Community Water development fund on behalf of Corrib
Navigation Trustees for the benefit of the Eglington Canal and Claddagh Basin.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was carried.
Item 4 (d)
Bruach na Coiribe, 1916 Commemoration Arch
The Mayor proceeded to take item 4 (d) re the Bruach na Coiribe, 1916 Commemoration Arch. Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty proposed that the location be as recommended by the Senior Executive Engineer. Cllr. B. Cameron
noted that anti-skid surfacing may be required.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Propose that the Commemoration Arch be located at the bottom end of the ramp, as recommended by the
Senior Executive Engineer.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The motion was carried.
13
Items 4 (e) and 4 (i)
The Mayor proposed to note items 4(e) and 4(i).
Proposed: The Mayor Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposal to note Items:
4 (e) Estate Management Strategy 2019 — 2023.
4 (i) Wifi4eu Scheme update.
In Favour: 15 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 16
The proposal was adopted and items listed were noted.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4.
Item 4 (b) - Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF) — Not Considered.
Item 4 (c) - Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (DITAS) — Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18 Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the Helipad on
the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and what are the long term
plans of UCH?"
Not considered
Q 4/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
ISt November 2018
Date Received:
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd at the
entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this effect but no update
has been given since.
Not considered.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
ISt November 2018
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our area LIS
meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not considered.
Q 8/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Keane
18th December 2018
14
In the matter of the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (DTTAS): Can you kindly confirm the Capital Projects
within Galway City for which Funding will be sought from the Department of Transport Tourism and Sport under
the LSSIF Scheme, closing date for Applications being the 17th April 2019.
Response issued 9th January 2019.
Q 9/18 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Keane
19th December 2018
Date Received:
In the matter of an Application by Galway City Council for a Foreshore License
In light of the response detailed below and received from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Planning &
Local Government Eoghan Murphy, can the Chief Executive kindly provide a full Report to Council on the validity
or otherwise of the existing Planning Permission held by Galway City Council to commence the Works in the
context of the material alterations and deviations cited by the Department at paragraph 4 of the Reply. Has
Galway City Council dealt with the query raised by the Department?
Response issued 9th January 2019.
8. CONFERENCES
Item 8 - Conferences and Training were proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and
were approved.
1)
2)
3)
4)
1)
Title: Social Media Dublin
Date: 1st February 2019
Venue: Radisson Blu Royal Hotel, Dublin
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Peter Keane
Title: Celtic Conferences - A Guide to EU Educational Programmes
Date: 8th, 9th & 10th February 2019
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely
Title: Celtic Conferences — Good Governance of Community, Voluntary & Charitable Organisations in
Ireland
Date: 22nd 23rd & 24th February 2019
Venue: O'Donovan's Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Billy Cameron
Title: Public Services 2019 — Transformation — Innovation - Delivery
Date: 28th February 2019
Venue: Croke Park, Dublin
Approved Training:
Title: AILG 'Draft Regional Spatial and Economic Stategies —A briefing for Elected Members'
Date & Venue: 17th January 2019, Hudson Bay Hotel, Athlone
Date & Venue: 19th January 2019, Mullingar Park Hotel, Mullingar
15
2)
9.
Date & Venue: 24th January 2019, Horse & Jockey Hotel, Tipperary
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Terry
O'Flaherty, Cllr. Frank Fahy & Cllr. John Walsh
Title: Institute of Professional Training — Local Elections 2019
Date: 15th, 16th & 17th February 2019
Venue: Radisson Blu, Letterkenny, Co. Donegal
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Billy Cameron & Cllr. John Walsh
VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy were proposed by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons, and were adopted.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Gråinne Ni Mhainfn R.I.P.
Nora Cahill R.I.P.
Jimmy Stewart R.I.P.
Bartley Hehir R.I.P.
Martina Donnellan R.I.P
Joan Davis R.I.P.
Sean Murphy R.I.P.
Rev. Canon Eugene Nee R.I.P.
Richard Pearson R.I.P.
Bartley Hehir R.I.P.
Eileen Newell R.I.P.
Barbara Davoren R.I.P.
Terry O'Brien R.I.P.
Votes of Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D.McDonnell and Seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron, and were
adopted.
7.
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
Joanne Murphy
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Nomination of Elaine Brick, AECOM, to Transport SPC by Galway Chamber — for noting - Not considered.
Local Authority Elected Members Role and Remuneration Review - Completion of Survey by Councillors.
Distributed December 2018. Not considered.
An Garda Siochåna Policing Plan 2019 letter to Stakeholders. Distributed Dec 2018. Not considered.
Submission of Statements and Certification regarding Disclosure of Donations 2018 - Circular F.IO/13 of
16 October 2013, and draft guidelines for elected members on the acceptance and reporting of political
donations - Circular Letter F.01/19. Distributed December 2018 & January 2019, for return by 31st
January 2019. Not considered.
Resolution adopted at December 2018 meeting of Monaghan County Council. Not considered.
Resolution adopted at December 2018 meeting of Adare-Rathkeale Municipal District of Limerick City &
County Council. Not considered.
16
10. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting finished at 6.00pm.
& Signed
Mayor of Galway
17