Minutes of the June Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14th June, 2021 at 3.00 p.m., in Leisureland, Salthill, Galway and
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
online via zoom platform
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; O. Hanley;
N. Larkin; D. Lyons; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy &
T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: Cllr. l. Byrne; C. Connolly; F. Fahy; C. Higgins;
E. Hoare; P. Keane & M. O'Connor
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
P. Greene, Director of Services
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
MS.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
B. McGrath, Chief Executive;
Mr.
D. Smyth, Head of Finance;
Mr.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. R. O'Reilly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Cormican, Executive Engineer
Mr. C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Ms. N. Farrell, Head of ICT
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the
agreed protocol for meetings.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that the agenda be considered in the order as set out. He advised that he
wished to have a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business under Standing Order no.
34 considered after Business Prescribed by Statute was concluded. This was seconded by Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty and agreed.
Minutes, Cofimed & Si
ayor of Galwv
D,an
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 10th May 2021 and adjournment meeting held on
24th May 2021
Mayor Cubbard invited matters of accuracy/matters arising.
Matters Arising:
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to the Annual Meeting scheduled for 3pm on Friday 18th June 2021. He
proposed that the time of the meeting be changed from 3pm to 4pm as a North Western Regional
Assembly meeting is scheduled on the same day at llam in Roscommon and that he and a number
of Councillors may be attending same.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty requested a response to her query regarding funding towards Rinville Park and
cemetery in Oranmore.
Cllr. O. Hanley requested a response to his query on the collection of vacant rates levies.
Cllr. M. O'Connor referred to her Motion no. 22/2021 regarding speed limit signage which was
seconded by Cllr. N. Murphy and requested if same could be considered.
Cllr. C. Connolly referred to:
- pg 3 of the minutes and requested legal advice regarding comments made by Cllr. M.J. Crowe at the
Council meeting held on Monday 10th May;
- pg IO request for details on the number of fines issued for dog fouling;
- pg 11 request for a public realm and outdoor dining in the Eastside of the city;
- has the Council met with residents of Raven Terrace and were their concerns taken on board;
- no clear demarcation for outdoor dining and concerns regarding appropriation of public space;
- concerns regarding the Barcelona declaration and access by the public.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to Choice Based Letting and if Garda Vetting was slowing down the process
and how long did it take.
Cllr. N. Murphy queried if outdoor dining was a permanent or a temporary COVID measure.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty queried if there was extra bin servicing in the city over the summer period,
particularly in Salthill at the weekends.
The Chief Executive responded to queries raised and advised that responses will issue to Councillors
on matters raised. He advised that it was not a matter for the Council to provide legal advice and this
was a matter for the individual Councillor.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services, Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services and Mr. D. Smyth, Head
of Finance responded to queries raised also.
2
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
The Annual Meeting be scheduled for 4pm on Friday 18th June, 2021
This was agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 10th May
2021 and adjournment meeting held on 24th May 2021
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of properties by
Approved Housing Bodies
Councillors discussed the report circulated. Matters raised by individual Councillors included the role
of the local authority; duplication of roles; query regarding value for money; purchase price limits;
allocations under the Scheme of Letting Priorities; homelessness services; mortgage process and
ownership; query if 193 Tür Uisce to be allocated a single unit; management fees; valuation process;
planning compliance and independent engineers reports.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to approve 2(a) Raising of a Loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition
of four properties by Approved Housing Bodies — per report circulated 9th June 2021
29 Lui na Gréine, Western Distributor Road;
14 Ruxton Court;
123 Boireann Bheag, Doughiska;
193 Tür Uisce, Doughiska.
This was agreed and approved.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised.
At 3.48pm, due to a power issue virtual attendees went temporarily offline.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That the meeting be adjourned until the technical issue is resolved.'
This was agreed.
The meeting resumed at 3.54pm.
3
2(b) Disposal of Lands at Monivea Road pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act,
2001, and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000
Councillors discussed the report circulated and matters raised by individual Councillors included
conditions for purchase; queries regarding the consideration price for the sizeable area of land; the
history of the lands in question and waste materials disposed on the lands; if adjacent landowners
could apply to purchase lands; the process of disposing of land; the current function and zoning of
the lands and if planning permission could be sought on same.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised by Councillors.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
2(b) To approve Disposal of Lands at Monivea Road pursuant to Section 183 of the Local
Government Act, 2001, and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development)
Act, 2000 — per report circulated 3rd June 2021.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy,
Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell,
Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 13 Against: 5 Abstain: O Present: 18
The disposal of lands was approved.
2(c) Disposal of Lands at Corrib Park pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001,
and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000
Councillors considered the report. Cllr. C. Connolly queried if there were utilities under the laneway
on the lands proposed for disposal.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services advised that he was unaware of any utilities located in this area.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
2(c) Disposal of Lands at Corrib Park pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001,
and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 — per report
circulated 3rd June 2021.
This was agreed and the disposal of lands was approved.
4
2(d) Disposal of Lands at Ballyburke, Galway, pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act,
2001, and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000
Councillors discussed the report circulated and matters and clarifications raised by individual
Councillors included: loss on disposal price relative to the purchase price paid for the lands and how
this balance will be made up; previous unsuitability of the site for Gaelscoil Mhic Amhlaigh; whether
Colåiste na Coiribe were consulted regarding need for a primary school and query regarding interest
paid annually on these lands.
Cllrs. T. O'Flaherty and N. Larkin made a declaration that they were board members of the GRETB.
This was noted.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
2(d) Disposal of Lands at Ballyburke, Galway, pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government
Act, 2001, and Section 211 of the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 —
circulated 17th May 2021.
This was agreed and the disposal of land was approved.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to read his motion for consideration under Standing Order no. 34, as
agreed. He spoke on the motion and the achievements and dedication of Pat Manogue.
Councillors discussed the motion and matters raised included if a policy process could be delivered
through the Corporate Policy Group membership for the naming of publicly owned lands and buildings
and the process for dealing with motions previously approved by former Council members regarding
naming of parks etc.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive referred to the role of An Coiste Logainmeacha and the Placenames
Committee and to the heavy work programme ahead for the coming months.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
That this Council proposes the establishment of a new committee whose membership will be
decided by the Corporate Policy Group with the goal of a comprehensive set policy on naming
publicly owned lands and buildings in the city after persons. This committee should aim to have
a report brought to Council no later than the Ordinary meeting in September.
This was agreed.
5
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote on the motion:
Motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business under Standing Order no. 34
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Supported by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. N. McNelis; Cllr. F. Fahy;
Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. D. McDonnell; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. N. Larkin & Cllr. C. Connolly
"Galway City Council agree to name the new grass football pitch under the Phase 2 development
at Corrib Park "Pat Manogue Park" in recognition of the tireless work carried out within the local
community by Pat Manogue over many decades with Corrib Rangers Football Club"
This was agreed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Draft minutes of Procedures Committee Meeting held on Thursday 13th May 2021
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
3(a) To note the draft minutes of Procedures Committee Meeting held on Thursday 13th May 2021
This was agreed and noted.
3(b) Nomination from Galway City Community Network (GCCN) to the Housing Strategic
Policy Committee
Cllr. O. Hanley queried if there was any update regarding GCCN membership on relevant Strategic
Policy Committees.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive gave an update on the
status of the mediation process.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
3(b) To note nomination from Galway City Community Network to the Housing Strategic Policy
Committee
This was agreed and noted.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator reminded Councillors of dates of upcoming
meetings. He also referred to a Mayoral Reception for Paddy Connolly and Joe O'Reilly
scheduled for 4pm on Tuesday 15th June in Leisureland advising that there will also be access
to same online.
The meeting concluded at 4.54pm.
6
Minutes of the Adjourned June Meeting of Galway City Council held on
Monday 28th June, 2021 at 3.00 p.m., in Leisureland, Salthill, Galway and online
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
via zoom platform
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; D. Lyons; D. McDonnell & N. McNelis
Councillors: M. Cubbard; C. Higgins; E. Hoare; N. Larkin;
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: F. Fahy; P. Keane & N. Murphy
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive;
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr. M. O'Donnell, A/Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
R. McNally, Director of Services;
Mr. D. Smyth, Head of Finance;
P. Greene, Director of Services
Mr.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager
Mr. C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Mr. R. O'Reilly, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Cormican, Executive Engineer
Ms. E. Kennedy, ARUP Consultant
Mr. B. Burke, ARUP Consultant
Mayor Connolly welcomed all to the adjourned meeting. She proposed to take the agenda items
in the order as laid out. This was agreed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a)Coirib go Cösta - Galway City Flood Relief Scheme - to receive presentation
Mayor Connolly invited Ms. Emer Kennedy, ARUP Consultants to give a presentation
Ms. E. Kennedy, Consultant gave a background to the Coirib go Césta project advising that Galway
City Council and the Office of Public Works commissioned ARUP consultants to deliver the project,
which is funded through Project Ireland 2040. She referred to Galway city centre and the Salthill
area which have historically been severely affected by flooding. In her presentation she outlined
7
the Study and Scheme Areas on a map; Project Objectives; the Scheme Communication Strategy;
Stakeholder Communication Engagement, Public Engagement Days; Next Steps in the
Development of Emerging Options and the Outline Project Timeline.
Mayor C. Connolly thanked Ms. Kennedy for the presentation and invited Councillors to raise
queries or comments.
Cllr. N. McNelis made a declaration to the meeting advising that he has personally been affected
by flooding in Galway city.
Councillors discussed the presentation with matters and clarifications raised including timelines; if
the project will be completed in phases and if the timelines can be expedited; the catchment area
for the scheme; projected costings and sources of funding and if this can be increased;
environmental impact assessment; protected habitats; the threat of costal erosion and the
position of Galway City Council in relation to same in areas like Gentian Hill; Silverstrand and Lough
Rusheen; query if the protection of buildings is the only focus or if habitats will be considered;
protected views and elements of the City Development Plan; flooding issues at Salthill car park and
the future of same; statutory and non-statutory consultation process and query if a leaflet drop to
residents associations was completed and request for an A3 map of Study and Scheme Area.
Ms. E. Kennedy, Consultant responded to queries raised and referred Councillors to the user
friendly website and webmapper.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer and Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive also responded to queries
raised.
4(b) COVID-19 Update regarding new public health measures: June 2021
Mayor C. Connolly raised issues regarding the delineation of outdoor dining spaces; the
consumption of alcohol in public places and advised that a meeting she requested on the matter
will be facilitated.
Councillors discussed the COVID-19 update and a number of Councillors raised individual issues
regarding businesses in Raven terrace; concerns regarding outdoor drinking; anti-social behaviour
by a minority; byelaws; licencing laws; concerns raised at a Joint Policing Committee; compliments
were expressed to the litter management unit and extra resources and musical and cultural
offerings.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
4(b) To note COVID-19 Update regarding new public health measures: June 2021
This was agreed and noted.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised and advised that the implementation
of outdoor dining is under constant review.
8
4(c) Galway BusConnects — Update on Public Consultation on:
(i) Cross City Link and
(ii) Dublin Road Bus Corridor
Mr. Colm O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer and Mr. B. Burke, Consultant, ARUP, gave a
presentation on Bus Connects Galway — The Cross-City Link covering: What is the Cross-City Link;
Emerging Preferred Scheme; Non Statutory Public Consultation; Stakeholder Engagement
Sessions; Landowner Meetings; Public Consultation Submissions; Public Sentiment; Emerging
Themes; the Current Status of the Project and the Next Steps.
Following the presentation, Mayor C. Connolly proposed that the second presentation on the
Dublin Road Bus Corridor be received, followed by contributions from Councillors.
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Transport Project Manager gave an overview of the project; the non-
Statutory Public Consultation Process; Dublin Road Transport Corridor Meetings/Stakeholders; the
Project Website https://bcgdublinroad.ie/; the Project Virtual Room; Leaflet and Media;
Responses; Key Issues; Positives and Next Steps.
Councillors discussed the presentation and matters raised by individual Councillors included
disability and access; landowners and position on leases, and, if public consultation for both; query
if any changes to designs and any up-to-date design for the Dublin Road; query regarding
Galwegian's entrance; concerns regarding proposed entrance to hotel at Belmont estate; query
regarding expected increase in public transport; Tuam Road bus lane; contingency plans; what area
of green space is proposed to be used to facilitate the projects; concerns regarding public
sentiments and timelines for the projects.
Mayor C. Connolly advised that contributions in the following order from Cllrs. T. O'Flaherty,
A. Cheevers, O. Hanley, D. Lyons, J. Connolly and C. Connolly will be heard at the July Ordinary
meeting on this agenda item.
Mayor C. Connolly sought approval of agenda item 7 and 10.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
7. Noting of Correspondence
This was agreed and approved.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
(a) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(c) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(e) Publication from Department of Social Protection, General Register Office -
Consultation on the reform of the method by which deaths are notified and registered
Public
9
(f) Correspondence dated 3rd March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Housing, Local Government & Heritage
(g) Correspondence dated 5th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Public Expenditure & Reform — Reply to NOM 30/2020 — Cllr. N. McNelis
(h) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Justice — Reply to NOM 3/2021 — Cllr. F. Fahy
(i) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Dün Laoghaire-Rathdown County
Council
(j) Correspondence dated 9th March 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(k) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Department of Housing, Local
Government & Heritage — Urban Regeneration and Development Fund — Ca112
(l) Correspondence dated 12th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Children, Equality, Disability, Integration & Youth — Reply to NOM 3/2021 — Cllr. F. Fahy
(m) Correspondence dated 15th March 2021 received from Valuation Office — Deferral of
Revaluation — Making of Order under section 21(4) of the Valuation Act
(n) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Kerry County Council.
(o) Correspondence dated 16th March 2021 received from Private Secretary to the Minister for
Finance - Reply to NOM 30/2020- Cllr. N. McNelis
(p) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Galway County Council
(q) Correspondence dated 24th March 2021 received from Louth County Council
(r) Correspondence dated 29th March 2021 received from Mayo County Council
(s) Correspondence dated 15th April 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(t) Correspondence dated 15th April 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(u) Correspondence dated 16th April 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(v) Correspondence dated 16th April 2021 received from Limerick City & County Council
(w) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council
(x) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council
(y) Correspondence dated 26th April 2021 received from Clare County Council
(z) Correspondence dated 30th April 2021 received from Dün Laoghaire-Rathdown County
Council
(a) Correspondence dated 7th May 2021 received from Fermanagh & Omagh District Council
(b) Correspondence dated 17th May 2021 received from Clare County Council
(c) Correspondence dated ISt June 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 2nd June 2021 received from Sligo County Council
(e) Correspondence dated 4th June 2021 received from Department of Housing, Local
Government and Heritage.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
IO. Approval of Votes of Sympathy / Congratulations
This was agreed and approved.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy
• Thomas (Tom) Collins R.I.P.
• Bridie Conway R.I.P.
Babbs Kelly R.I.P.
10
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Special Meetings of Galway City Council be held to conclude consideration of the Chief
Executive's Report on the Pre-draft Plan Consultation Process for the Galway City
Development Plan 2023 — 2029 in Leisureland, Salthill, Galway and online on the following
dates:
Monday, 5th July, 2021 at 3pm
Tuesday 6th July 2021 at 3pm (if required)
Wednesday, 7th July, 2021 at 3pm (if required)
Thursday, 8th July, 2021 at 3pm (if required)
At the Special meeting on Monday 5th July that the first item on the agenda be to deal with
Chief Executive recommendations No 75-101 which have already been discussed.
To include Consideration of the rate of Local Property Tax on the Agenda of the July Council
meeting scheduled for Monday 12th July and an adjourned July meeting to be held on Monday
19th July 2021, and, if necessary, a second adjournment meeting on Wednesday 21st July.
This was agreed and approved.
Myra Ryan R.I.P.
4(d) Cycle Network Projects Update
Not Considered.
4(e) Decarbonising Zones - Report circulated May 2021 - To Hear a Presentation
Not Considered.
4(f) Galway County Council draft County Development Plan RSES(MASP) - Draft Vision
Statement for former Galway Airport Site at Carnmore
Not Considered.
4(g) Urban Regeneration & Development Fund (Call 2)
Not Considered.
4(h) Galway City Council lands adjacent to Cappagh Park
Not Considered.
4(i) Webcasting of Galway City Council Meetings
Not Considered.
4(j) Galway City Council Digital Strategy
Not Considered.
4(k) Chief Executive's Report:
i. May 2021
ii. June 2021
Not Considered.
11
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary
excavation works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan,
Thomas Caffrey and Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at
Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie
beneath the paving slabs of the yard where they were executed in 1883 for their part in the
Phoenix Park assassinations. The families of the five men are represented by the National
Graves Association and the wish of the families is for their relatives to be exhumed from
Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment
that international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national
corporations to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should
be fully and properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification
Not Considered.
NOM 11/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to support calls from the FSU (Financial services Union)
asking the Minister for Finance to support a moratorium on branch closures during the
pandemic. This will provide an opportunity for all parties concerned to discuss what
direction the future of Banking in Ireland should take.
Not Considered.
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered.
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to
councillors and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings
12
in administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered.
Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021 and agreed for inclusion on
the agenda for Special meeting.
Supported by: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda.
NOM 20/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 15th April 2021
That Galway City Council write to Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and
Media Catherine Martin to welcome the recent announcement of funding to create a Water
Sports Centre at the Terryland Waterworks site and obtain a plan of proposed works
together with a planned timeline for delivery.
This funding will be a key piece of infrastructure along the River Corrib blue way currently
being progressed.
The waterways in Galway are major asset to the city and the creation of state of the art
facilities for outdoor water based activities is most welcome.
Not Considered.
NOM 22/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 27th April 2021
I request Galway City Council Transport Department replace incorrect speed limit signage.
This was to be carried out with current rejected bye laws but now needs correction on its
own merit for safety particularly of pedestrians and cyclists.
Not Considered.
NOM 24/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Galway City Council calls on the Department of Local Government to introduce a bathing
water quality testing regime for the period not included in the current testing cycle.
Not Considered.
13
NOM 26/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
Recognising the Council's role as a planning authority, in providing climate leadership, and
in public procurement, that Galway City Council will require proof of planning permission
from a supplier when buying resources sourced from a quarry.
That Galway City Council ask the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre to
invoke a similar requirement.
That Galway City Council will work with other Local Authorities to ensure where possible a
convergence of approach in dealing with any supplier that has been prosecuted for illegal
quarrying, or is known to be sourcing material from SACS or SPAs.
That this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities.
Not Considered.
NOM 28/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 10th May 2021 - Wording amended on 24th May 2021
That Galway City Council call for:
• Free Travel pass to be extended to people with epilepsy who may be temporarily
off the road due to their condition and/or who may be unable to drive because of
their condition.
• Students who may experience a seizure during state examinations are afforded the
opportunity to resit their exam within the same exam cycle
Not Considered.
NOM 29/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 10th May 2021
In light of the enormous numbers of the public participating in sea swimming in Galway
City, I call on Galway City Council to immediately begin water quality testing and publishing
of results at every beach in Galway City so that the public can make informed decisions
regarding their health and safety before they go for a swim.
Response issued 2nd June 2021.
NOM 30/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 17th May 2021
That Galway City Council shall prepare Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, under the Road Traffic
Act 2004, to introduce a 30km/h inner speed limit zone. That these bye-laws will be in-
keeping with a cohesive approach to transport management in the city, but that they shall
be presented as standalone Bye-laws to be voted on by Councillors.
Not Considered.
14
NOM 31/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 30th May 2021
Galway City Council initiate a traffic management plan for Silverstrand which includes the
use of automated signage.
Not Considered.
NOM 32/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd June 2021
Calling on Galway City Council recreation and amenities department to hold town hall type
meeting with sports clubs and community groups for engagement and consultation as they
review the recreation and amenities in the city in 2021.
Response issued 4th June 2021
6. QUESTIONS
Question 13/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. P. Keane
Date Received: 7th April 2021
During the currency of the 2014-2019 Council, a Motion was passed directing the Executive
of Galway City Council ("GCC") to revert to Councillors with a full Report prior to GCC
considering any request by the Tenant of the property situate at Forster Street Galway
comprising the old Tourist Office to transfer its interest in the property to any Third Party.
The property compromises the former Tourist Office at Forster Street Galway held by way
of Lease granted by GCC to Féilte Ireland for the operation of a Tourist Office. In
circumstances where no such Report was prepared and/or furnished to Councillors in
compliance with the terms of the Motion, can Galway City Council explain how and why a
formal Consent issued to Fåilte Ireland whereby GCC consented to the Assignment, Sub-
Lease or otherwise of the existing Lease in respect of the Property.
Response issued 9th June 2021
Question 14/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd May 2021
To ask for an update on Galway City Council's Vacant Site Register; was the €322,000 due
in January from the 6 sites on the register, per the latest update to the Planning SPC,
collected to support the provision of housing and regeneration of land by the Council, has
a review of the next sites progressed and if so what is the number of individual sites
identified at this stage, and will the Council update Councillors should additional sites be
added to the Register?
Not Considered.
15
Question 16/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. J. Connolly
Date Received: 2nd June 2021
What works are required to enable Galway City Council to remove the Perspex sheeting
surrounding the Browne Doorway and ensure the safe continued display of the doorway at
its current location in Eyre Square? Can costings be provided for the required work?
Not Considered.
Question 17/2021
Question Given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th June 2021
Could you please assist with a written reply to this question on the Galway Connemara and
Barna Greenways.
1. What happened to Atkins plan from 2016? Why has it not been progressed?
2. Eglinton Canal update. Can this be expedited?
3. What are the Council's envisaged route options for the Silver Strand to City centre
walking / cycling track?
4. Is the County council doing the section from Silverstrand onwards i.e. is the project
being split?
Why will recruitment of Active travel staff take so long?
Not Considered.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
9. CONFERENCES
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 4.58 pm.
16