Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14th September, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Connolly; P. Keane.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Ms. L. Mitchell, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. N. Moggan, Financial Management Accountant
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer
Ms. E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mayor Cubbard opened the Meeting and proposed that the Agenda be considered as set out. He
proposed that consideration of Item 4(c) Arts Grants be dealt with alongside Item 3(b) Draft note
of Corporate Policy Group virtual briefing of 7th August 2020 following discussion of same at this
meeting.
Cllr. C. Higgins requested that Agenda Item 10. Votes of Sympathy be considered and this was
agreed.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Cllr. C. Higgins proposed the approval of Item 10. Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations. This was
agreed by Councillors.
Vote of Sympathy
Cllr. Higgins expressed her condolences to the family of the late Mr. John Joseph Fahey, a first
cousin of Cllr. F. Fahy. She spoke of the former premier of New South Wales and former federal
Minister for Finance and the late Mr. FahVs key role in the bid for the Sydney Olympics.
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty expressed sympathy on the passing of Mr. Michael Derrane; father of friend
and colleague Mr. Benny Derrane.
Vote of Congratulations
Mrs. A O'Sullivan
Min s, Con ed& Signed
Mayor of Galway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th July 2020 & Adjournments of meeting held on
15th, 20th & 22nd July
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th
July 2020 & Adjournments of meeting held on 15th, 20th & 22nd July
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Matters Arising
Queries raised included item 2(d) at the Council meeting held on 13th July regarding the reason
why temporary lighting was not installed at Cappagh Park; a request was made that Local
Authority (Part 8) Planning applications be made available online to the public and the democratic
importance of Council meetings was raised querying if the duration of meetings could be
increased from the current two hour limit.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised in relation to lighting at
Cappagh Park confirming that permanent lighting will be installed by the end of November.
Mr. G. McMahon confirmed that the latest advice from the Local Government Management
Agency and public health advice is that the duration of Council meetings be limited to two hours.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Consideration of rate of Local Property Tax under Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as
amended)
The Chief Executive gave a detailed summary of the Report and Circular Fin 12/2020 that issued
to Councillors. He outlined the severe negative impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic
across all income streams of the Council. Mr. McGrath advised that the report was a proposal,
based on balancing the preliminary budget. Mr. McGrath recommended to vary the basic rate of
LPT by + 15% to ensure that all essential services can continue to be provided. Any amendment to
LPT will be for one year only, and will be decided again in 2021, and year on year.
Mr. McGrath highlighted other budgetary considerations including: that all essential services must
be maintained during the pandemic period; that increased costs to homeless services be funded;
that responsibilities in the areas of Economic Development and Tourism Promotion be carried out;
that the City Development Plan be delivered successfully; support for Home Adatation and
Mobility grants and works be maintained and to continue to set aside matching funding required
for Sports Capital projects and the expansion of Galway City Museum.
The report was discussed in detail,Queries and clarifications from Councillors included: reform of
LPT; percentage of any LPT increase retaine locally; transparency and need to outline use of LPT
fun s i.e. grass cutting and street cleani g services; deferral of the revaluation of LPT by
2 | Page
Government; increased responsibility for homelessness; review of LPT and inclusion of Councillors
in this process and the City Council's responsibility to pay social housing property tax.
The Chief Executive and Ms. N. Moggan, Financial Management Accountant responded
comprehensively to Councillors queries and clarifications.
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed to retain the Local Property Tax at the same rate as presently. This
was seconded by the Mayor, Cllr M. Cubbard. An amendment was put forward by Cllr. M. O'
Connor. In line with Standing Orders; the amendment is taken first.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O'Connor Seconded by: Cllr. N. Murphy
I propose Local Property Tax is increased by 15%.
In favour: 3 Against: 13 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Amendment was defeated.
Cllr. D. Lyons also proposed an amendment to the original motion. In In line with Standing
Orders; the amendment is taken first.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
I propose Local Property Tax is increased by 10%.
In favour: 5 Against: 11 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Amendment was defeated.
Mayor Cubbard read the original motion as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
I propose that there be No variation to the Basic Rate of LPT for 2021.
In favour: 12 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
Under Standing Order No. 34, a Motion was submitted for the purpose of dealing with urgent
business by Cllr. M.J. Crowe. Councillors gave their support for the motion. Mayor Cubbard read
the motion as follows:
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That Galway City Council immediately move to implement the assurances given to the Collins
Family before, during and after the 'Kirwan Roundabout Part VIII Process'. These assurances
were given both publicly and privately. Despite this the family have largely been ignored and
this needs to be urgently addressed.'
31 Page
Councillors discussed the motion.
Cllr. F. Fahy read a note from the minute of the oral hearing outlining a commitment to the Collins
family as follows: 'Inspector: Collins have access onto the N84 as part of the scheme.
Mr. Daly: One the diversion of the Coolough Road was moved to avoid headlight glaring. The
access from and into the property., committed to proving a signal actuated light at that point.
Was highlighted in the Part 8 drawings. Right turn facility. Then can come out and make a right
turn now whereas before they could now. The can cross over — from a green light.'
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that he has received legal correspondence regarding this
matter earlier in the previous week. He is in the process of issuing a response to same. He
requested that the motion remain on the Agenda and that a report regarding this matter will be
brought before Council for consideration. This was agreed by Councillors.
2(b) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Ard na Coille Estate
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
'l propose that the Ard na Coille Estate (R(11)154, Maunsells Road be taken in charge by
Galway City Council under Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993.' - per Report circulated 9th
September 2020.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
2(c) To set the date of the Annual Budget Meeting - Proposed for 16th November 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'That the Annual Budget Meeting be scheduled for Monday 16th November 2020.'
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
2(d) Raising of a loan under the Capital Assistance Scheme for the acquisition of properties by
Approved Housing Bodies
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services referred Councillors to the Report issued outlining the 11
no. Approved Housing Body CAS acquisitions by Galway Simon Community, COPE Galway, Peter
McVerry Trust and DePaul Housing Association. He advised that these units are being acquired
by the Approved Housing Bodies for the provision of housing for a number of different projects.
He confirmed that all properties have been supported by an independent valuation and
represent good value for money. Mr. D. Mahon recommended approval of the proposed Capital
Assistance Scheme loans.
4 | Page
Councillors discussed the report and raised queries including: tenancy nomination rights; rent
payments; refurbishment and acquisition costs. To which; Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries
raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To approve the proposed 11. no. Capital Assistance Scheme loans — per Report circulated 9th
September 2020.'
8 Garrai Coirce, Clybaun Road 2 Bed Unit to be acquired by Galway Simon Community for
1.
Homeless Prevention
13 Drom Ard, Prospect Hill 1 Bed Unit to be acquired by Galway Simon Community for Housing
2.
First
15 Bridgewater Court, Fairhill Road 1 Bed Unit to be acquired by Galway Simon Community for
3.
Housing Led Homeless Project
147 Lios an Uisce, Doughiska 2 Bed Unit to be acquired by Galway Simon Community for Housing
4.
Let Homeless Project
4 Beechwood Park, Ballybane Road 4 Bed Unit to be acquired by COPE Galway for Homeless
5.
Transitional Accommodation
54 Drisin, Ballymoneen Road 1 Bed Unit to be acquired by COPE Galway for Homeless Prevention
6.
70 Ard Alainn, Ballybane 3 Bed Unit to be acquired by COPE Galway for Homeless Prevention
7.
113 Rosan Glas, Rahoon 4 Bed Unit to be acquired by COPE Galway for Homeless Transitional
8.
Accommodation for Single Women
50 Tur Uisce, Doughiska 3 Bed Unit to be acquired by Peter McVerry Trust for Homeless
9.
Prevention
52 Tur Uisce, Doughiska 3 Bed Unit to be acquired by Peter McVerry Trust for Homeless Prevention
10.
11. 207 Laurel Park, Newcastle 3 Bed Unit to be acquired by DePaul Housing Association
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The approval of the 11 no. Capital Assistance Scheme loans was passed unanimously.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Draft note of Procedures Committee virtual briefing of 17th July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
'To note the minute of the Procedures Committee virtual briefing of 17th July 2020'.
This was agreed.
3(b) Draft note of Corporate Policy Group virtual briefing of 7th August 2020.
Cllr. O. Hanley requested that Item 4(c) Arts Grants be considered under Agenda Item as 3(b) was
agreed at the start of the meeting. This was agreed and item 3(b) was noted.
51 Page
4(c) Arts Act Grants 2020
Cllr. O. Hanley proposed that the Arts Grants 2020 be approved as recommended to the Corporate
Policy Group.
Councillors welcomed the funding and commended the work of Mr. Harrold and the team.
Councillors discussed the Arts grants proposal.
Mr. J. Harrold gave the background to the application and assessment process of the applications
received to Councillors and responded to queries raised.
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
'To accept the Arts grants proposal in the amount of €425,000 per Report circulated 11th
September 2020'.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
3(c) Draft note of Procedures Committee virtual briefing of 8th Sept 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To note the Draft minute of the Procedures Committee virtual briefing of 8th Sept 2020'.
This was agreed.
Mayor Cubbard proposed that adjournment meetings of the September Council meeting be
held on Monday 21st and Monday 28th September at 3 p.m. in Leisureland and that Agenda
Item 3(d) Corporate Policy Group virtual meeting on 10th September 2020 be considered as
the first item on the Agenda at the next meeting.
This was agreed.
The Meeting concluded at 5 p.m.
61 Page
Presiding:
Present:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the September adjournment meeting
held on Monday 21st September, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Connolly
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
MS.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
P. Foley, Meetings Administrator
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mayor Cubbard opened the meeting and commenced with item 3(d) as agreed at the Council
meeting held on Monday 14th September 2020.
3(d) Corporate Policy Group virtual meeting on 10th September 2020
Mr. R. Lehmann addressed the meeting referring to the June Council meeting where Councillors
agreed to allocate funding of €485,000 from the Marketing Fund to a Tourism Recovery Fund to
fund initiatives and increase footfall in Galway city from September until March 2021. Mr.
Lehmann advised that an open call was held inviting applications for funding and 26 applications
were received. He confirmed that these application were assessed and recommended to the
Corporate Policy Group. He added that there is flexibility regarding the adjustment of dates of
some events like the Comedy Festival, where possible under current restrictions. Mr. Lehmann
recommended grant payments in the amount of €150,000 to Council for approval.
Councillors discussed the Report and its proposals and complimented the work of the Economic
Development Unit. Matters raised included the positive impact of a two page feature in the Irish
Independent on Galway city; parking in the city and hotel occupancy rates.
71 Page
Cllr. F. Fahy requested that the Notice of Motion he submitted on 6th July regarding parking in the
city be considered.
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the city
that parking in the city on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to
encourage people to come into the city.'
Following discussion, it was agreed that the Motion will be considered following receipt of a
report from the Transportation Department outlining the legal and cost consequences of such a
measure. Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer advised that a Report will be sent to Councillors on the
matter for consideration at the October Council meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
'To approve funding in the amount of €150,000 under the Tourism Recovery Fund - per
Report issued on Friday 11th September, 2020.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Mayor Cubbard requested that the matter of a funding request from Leisureland be considered.
Mayor Cubbard declared to the meeting that he was previously on the Board of Leisureland and
had resigned from same in 2014.
Leisureland Funding Request
Mr. P. Foley, Meetings Administrator advised that it was a decision for each individual Councillor
to declare any interest or conflict of interest regarding this matter.
A number of Councillors declared their positions on the Board of Leisureland confirming no
financial gain including Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. O. Hanley and Cllr. N.
Larkin. Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services declared his position as Company Secretary.
Mr. B. Barrett gave a comprehensive background to the operations of Leisureland since the
COVID-19 pandemic affected operations in March 2020. Mr. Barrett outlined a funding request
from Galway Salthill Féilte CLG to maintain services at the Leisureland complex. This request was
submitted to the Chief Executive and subsequently circulated to Councillors on Friday 18th
September for consideration.
Mr. Barrett advised that under current circumstances, the financial situation for the operation of
the Leisureland facility under COVID-19 restrictions will result in an operating deficit of €507,337
at the end of 2020. This would be followed by a projected operating loss of €857,376 in 2021. This
would result in Galway City Council having to provide an additional subsidy of €207,337 in 2020
8 | Page
(in addition to the €300,000 already provided by Galway City Council in 2020) and a subsidy of
€857,376 in 2021.
In these circumstances the Board of Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG outlined the following options that
face them and the preference of the Board is to implement option 1 with the support of Galway
City Council.
Option 1
Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG operate Leisureland on a reduced service basis whereby the Pool and
Gym operations of the facility are fully closed, staff are placed on temporarily laid off and transfer
to the COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment and a skeleton staff are retained to operate
the meeting rooms, hall and external areas of the facility as a going concern. It estimated that this
would cost Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG a net €178,167 in excess of income to do so until the end of
2020. This course of action would enable Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG to operate the site at an
estimated net loss of €73,500 in 2021. To be in a position to do this Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG
would require from Galway City Council the advancement of a loan of €178,167 in 2020 to offset
against costs to the end of 2020 on the commitment to reduce operations from now until COVID-
19 restrictions have been lifted.
This loan could be repaid from subsidy provided by Galway City Council in 2021. If Galway City
Council was to allocate a subsidy in 2021 equivalent to the 2020 figure of €300,000, Galway Salthill
Fåilte CLG could be a situation to repay the advance loan for 2020 of €178,166.53 and meet the
majority of the projected 2021 deficit of €73,500, once the facility was operated at the reduced
service level of just meeting rooms/event hall and outside services. Any shortfall between subsidy
approved by Galway City Council in the budgetary process along with the reduced running costs
for 2021 could be taken from reserves put aside for the future development of Leisureland site.
The advantages of Option 1 are proposed by the Board as following;
Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG have shown previously that they are the best suited organisation
to manage the facility through a crisis (as previously done during the flooding of the Pool
in 2014) and return it to an operating profit situation once the restrictions of COVID-19
are gradually lifted;
Maintaining operations in the event hall and meeting rooms would keep activity on site
during daytime hours, in the evening time and at weekends. This would reduce the
likelihood of antisocial behaviour on the site during these times;
Maintaining the skeleton staff would ensure that some degree of the expert knowledge of
the operation of the facility built up over the past 25+ years which is invaluable in the
ongoing operation of the facility;
The costs of securing the site and maintaining security at the site in medium term in the
event of a full closure of the facility would not be insignificant and would present a further
drain on the finances of Galway City Council without the potential to generate any income
on the site;
Closing the facility fully would result in deterioration of the Capital Asset on the site which
would result in further costs to Galway City Council to bring the facility back into full
operation in the future;
91 Page
Retaining some operations on site by Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG enable a quicker response
to fully reopening the facility as COVID-19 restrictions change in the medium to longer
term. It also enable the company to respond to potential income generation proposals
that may arise between now and the end of 2021;
Maintaining some level of operations on the site, however limited, would be a positive
statement of the commitment of Galway City Council and Galway Salthill Fåilte to meet
the challenges of COVID-19. The activities proposed to generate income from Hall and
meeting room rental involve activities that address the mental wellbeing of the citizens of
Galway.
Mr. Barrett proceeded to outline option no. 2:
Option 2
Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG advise Galway City Council that it is no longer in a position to operate
Leisureland without additional funding from the City Council and fully wind down the company.
In this scenario, Galway City Council would be liable for the outstanding debts owed by Galway
Salthill Fåilte CLG including redundancies. It has been estimated that this situation would involve
further minimum expenditure of €278,559. This scenario would also involve the City Council
having to undertake the securing of the Salthill site from date of full closure and on into 2021.
Councillors discussed the request from Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG and matters and clarifications
raised included: staff welfare; physical and mental health and welfare of the community; use of
facility by clubs and groups; operation of private facilities; funding opportunities from
Government; consideration of temporary private operation of facility; variation in figures
provided; wage costs; standards; status of staff payments; actions taken by the Board; refund
costs to members; approval loan of €9.1 million for new facility; query if any request, discussions
or response from the Government on the issue; the lack of further options; financial expertise;
Government subvention; poor explanation and compliments were paid to the staff of the facility.
Mayor Cubbard advised that he resigned from the Board of Leisureland in 2014 when it was
advised to him at the time that the Chief Executive of Galway City Council had the authority to
overrule any decision of the Board based on the legal agreement between Galway City Council
and Galway Salthill Fåilte in regard to the operation of the facility. He felt that this resulted in the
Board being merely a 'talking shop'.
Mr. B. Barret responded to queries and clarifications raised in detail.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that at the Board meeting of Galway Salthill Fåilte on Friday
September 11th the Chief Executive advised the Board that Galway City Council had no provision
in the 2020 budget for such an additional contribution and that the City Council would be
operating under severe financial constraints in 2021 and that he could not commit in advance of
the council striking a budget for 2021 that the City Council would be able to fund the predicted
losses for 2021. The Chief Executive requested that the Board look at alternative options.
IO I Page
Cllr. J. Connolly proposed that the amount of €207,337 be approved. This was seconded by Cllr.
N. McNelis.
Cllr. Niall Murphy proposed an amendment. In line with Standing Orders the amendment is
considered first.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Murphy Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
'To accept Option 1 per Report circulated on September 18th 2020
Option 1
Galway Salthill Féilte CLG operate Leisureland on a reduced service basis whereby the Pool and
Gym operations of the facility are fully closed, staff are placed on temporarily laid off and
transfer to the COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment and a skeleton staff are retained
to operate the meeting rooms, hall and external areas of the facility as a going concern. It
estimated that this would cost Galway Salthill Féilte CLG a net €178,167 in excess of income to
do so until the end of 2020. This course of action would enable Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG to
operate the site at an estimated net loss of €73,500 in 2021. To be in a position to do this
Galway Salthill Fåilte CLG would require from Galway City Council the advancement of a loan
of €178,167 in 2020 to offset against costs to the end of 2020 on the commitment to reduce
operations from now until COVID-19 restrictions have been lifted.
This loan could be repaid from subsidy provided by Galway City Council in 2021. If Galway City
Council was to allocate a subsidy in 2021 equivalent to the 2020 figure of €300,000, Galway
Salthill Fåilte CLG could be a situation to repay the advance loan for 2020 of €178,166.53 and
meet the majority of the projected 2021 deficit of €73,500, once the facility was operated at
the reduced service level of just meeting rooms/event hall and outside services. Any shortfall
between subsidy approved by Galway City Council in the budgetary process along with the
reduced running costs for 2021 could be taken from reserves put aside for the future
development of Leisureland site.
In favour: 3 Against: 13 Abstain: 1 Present: 17
The Motion was not passed.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
'To approve Option 1 with the provision of an additional €207,337 rather than €178,166.53
sought so as to enable the Pool and Gym operations of the facility to remain open until the
end of the year'.
In favour: 13 Against: 2 Abstain: 2 Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
111 Page
Mayor Cubbard advised that a number of Notices of Motion were submitted under Standing
Orders No. 34 to deal with urgent business. He proceeded to have these Notices considered by
the Council. The first motion referred to the reversal of current road works at Dyke Road.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive advised the meeting that said works at the Dyke Road were brought
before Council in the July Chief Executive's Report. He advised that it would be premature to pass
the motion without traffic expert advice and considering issues.
Councillors discussed the Motion put forward and a vote was taken:
Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. M. O'Connor; Cllr. O. Hanley;
Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. D. McDonnell.
'That Galway City Council immediately reverse the works carried out at the Dyke Road this
morning and carry out a full safety audit of their proposal and that proper local consultation
commence before any reinstatement of works.'
In favour: 14 Against: 2 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded with the consideration of the following motion. Councillors considered
the motion and a vote was taken:
NOM 17/2020
Raised under Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
Date Received: 29th July 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. D. Lyons; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. O'Connor; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. D. McDonnell.
'That this Council calls on Debenhams to grant their former Debenhams employees an
additional two weeks redundancy payment, in addition to the statutory two weeks' payment,
in recognition of the years of loyal service they have given to the company.'
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Mayor Cubbard read the following motion for consideration by Council. The motion was discussed
and a vote was taken on same:
NOM 54/2019
Date Received: 8th October 2019
Under Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
12 | Page
Wording of Motion amended slightly and change in Minister reflected.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. M. O'Connor; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. T. O'Flaherty;
Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy & Cllr. D. McDonnell.
'That this Local Authority write to the Minister of Public Expenditure and Reform, Michael
McGrath, TD; "According to the European Commission, regional disparities in Ireland are
among the highest in the European Union. As a result of our poor economic performance the
west and border region (NUTS 11) has been downgraded from 'Developed' to 'in Transition'. All
the economic indicators show a trend towards widening regional inequality. Management and
delivery of European Regional Development Funds is essential to the regions performance and
we ask that these funds continue to be managed by the regions (NWRA), in the regions with
increased flexibility and consistent with regional priorities.'
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Cllr. C. Higgins requested a Notice of Motion to be considered as follows:
Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Signed by: Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty, Cllr. M. O'Connor,
Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, N. Murphy, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. N. Larkin & Cllr. D. McDonnell.
'That Galway City Council agrees to provide a temporary coach and bus stop facility in the city
in order that passengers can be collected and dropped off, until a solution is found regarding
the ongoing difficulties at Galway Coach Station.'
Mayor Cubbard advised that due to time constraints that this Notice of Motion will be heard as
first item on the Agenda at the September adjournment meeting scheduled for Monday 28th
September. This was agreed.
3(e) Briefing on Planning Strategic Policy Committee held on 1st September 2020 Noted.
3(f) Briefing on Transport Strategic Policy Committee held on 07th September 2020 Noted.
3(g) Briefing on Economic, Community and Cultural SPC held on 4th Sept 2020 Noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. M. O' Connor
To note Items:
3(e) Briefing on Planning Strategic Policy Committee held on 1st September 2020
3(f) Briefing on Transport Strategic Policy Committee held on 07th September 2020
3(g) Briefing on Economic, Community and Cultural SPC held on 4th Sept 2020
This was agreed and the minutes were noted.
13 | Page
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To note Correspondence.'
This was agreed.
(a) Correspondence dated 25th June 2020 from Roscommon County Council. Noted.
(b) Correspondence dated 13th July 2020 from Sligo County Council. Noted.
(c) Correspondence dated 13th July 2020 from Sligo County Council. Noted.
(d) Correspondence dated 14th July 2020 from Limerick City & County Council. Noted.
(e) Correspondence dated 16th July 2020 from Congregation of the Brothers of Charity. Noted.
(f) Correspondence dated 7th August 2020 from Department of Housing, Planning and Local
Government — LG 04-2020. Noted.
(g) Correspondence dated 20th August 2020 from Louth County Council. Noted.
(h) Correspondence dated 21st August 2020 from Fermanagh & Omagh Council. Noted.
9. CONFERENCES
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To approve Conferences and Approved Training.'
This was agreed.
(a) Title: Public Services 2020 (Retrospective)
Venue: Online
Date: 4th September 2020
Approved Training
Title: AILG Module 3, "Moorhead Report—A Briefing for Elected Members" (Retrospective)
Date & Venue: 25th July 2020 — Clayton Whites Hotel, Wexford
Date & Venue: 30th July 2020 — Carrickdale Hotel & Spa, Dundalk
Date & Venue: 6th August 2020 — Horse & Jockey Hotel, Thurles
Date & Venue: 8th August 2020 — Sligo Park Hotel
Date & Venue: 11th August 2020— Midlands Park Hotel, Portlaoise
Date & Venue: 13th August 2020 — Rochestown
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Declan
McDonnell & Cllr. Alan Cheevers.
141 Page
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the September adjournment meeting
held on Monday 28th September, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Hanley,
C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillors: C. Connolly & F. Fahy
McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. B.
Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. B.
Phelan, A/Director of Services
Ms. C.
Prendergast, A/Director of Services
Mr. T.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator welcomed all and referred Councillors to Standing
Operating Guidelines for attendance at Council meetings by Elected Members & Council
Officials/Others (media and public) and other meetings or Council buildings that issued to
attendees in advance of the meeting. He advised that the guidelines were approved by the Health
& Safety Operational Committee of the Local Government Management Authority (LGMA) and
were also discussed and agreed with both the Local Authority Members Association (LAMA) and
the Association of Irish Local Government (AILG) and carries logos of these organisations. He
advised that an additional requirement from the guidelines includes the completion and return
of a COVID-19 Self declaration form by each attendee in advance of each meeting. The guidelines
advise that meeting times should not exceed a recommended maximum of 1 hour and 55 minutes.
The document was noted by Councillors.
Mayor Cubbard advised that under Standing Order no. 34 a Notice of Motion was submitted by
Cllr. C. Higgins at the end of the last meeting held on Monday 21st September and it was agreed
to consider same as first item at this adjournment meeting. Cllr. D. McDonnell seconded Cllr. C.
Higgins's motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Mayor Cubbard proposed that Item 4(d) Water Services Report be considered; followed by
Item 4(a) Chief Executive's Reports for July and September.
151 Page
That a Special Meeting be held on Monday 5th October at 3 p.m. in Leisureland to consider
Notices of Motions on the Agenda.
That an adjournment meeting of the October Council meeting on 12th October be held on
Monday 19th October at 3pm in Leisureland.
This was agreed.
Mayor Cubbard proceeded to read Cllr. C. Higgins's Notice of Motion submitted:
Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Signed by: Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty, Cllr. M. O'Connor,
Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. E. Hoare and Cllr. N. Larkin.
'That Galway City Council agrees to provide a temporary coach and bus stop facility in the city
in order that passengers can be collected and dropped off, until a solution is found regarding
the ongoing difficulties at Galway Coach Station.'
Councillors discussed the motion. Matters raised included transportation; tourism; private bus
operator difficulties; security of tenure; terms and conditions; leasehold; pricing set by the Coach
station; correspondence received by Councillors; communication; COVID issues; ownership of
land; role of Galway City Council and a response from the Chief Executive was requested.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive gave a background to the history of the development of the site
being discussed. He advised that Galway City Council has a lease in place under Section 183
legislation approved by a previous Council, but he confirmed that the City Council have no day to
day role in the operation of the Coach Station as a privately operated entity. He recommended
that the motion be left on the agenda and that the matter should in the first instance be referred
to the Transportation Strategic Policy Committee for discussion and come back to full Council by
way of a Report.
Cllr. D. McDonnell withdrew his seconding of the Motion and a vote was taken that the motion
remain on the Agenda as follows:
Standing Order no. 34 Notice of Motion
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Signed by: Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty, Cllr. M. O'Connor,
Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. E. Hoare and Cllr. N. Larkin.
'That Galway City Council agrees to provide a temporary coach and bus stop facility in the city
in order that passengers can be collected and dropped off, until a solution is found regarding
the ongoing difficulties at Galway Coach Station.
161 Page
And that this Motion remain on the Agenda and is referred to the Transportation Strategic
Policy Committee and a Report be given to the full Council on the matter.'
In favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: 3 Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator advised Councillors that when a Vote is taken on a
matter; if Councillors do not Vote For or Against and do not raise their hand to Abstain from the
vote; it will be considered and noted that they have Abstained for that particular vote. This was
noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(d) Water Services - To receive a report on current and future issues on water and waste water
in the Galway metropolitan area
Ms. E. Fanning gave a comprehensive presentation relating to Water Services Capital Provision in
Galway City covering: Water Supply and Terryland Water Treatment Plant (WTP); Water
Abstraction License; Water Capital Projects including: Galway West Water Supply Scheme: New
Intake at Terryland WTP and Rising Main; Galway City Watermain Rehabilitation Project and the
Water Network Programme.
Ms. Fanning informed Councillors on the Wastewater and Mutton Island Wastewater Treatment
Plant; Current Capacity; Future Wastewater load requirements; Galway Drainage Area Plan (DAP);
The Galway Sewer Rehabilitation Programme; Ardaun Multi Unit Housing Development (MUHDs)
Site; Water Demand Calculation and Wastewater Demand Calculation.
Councillors complimented the work of Ms. Fanning and the Water Services team. Councillors
discussed the Report and matters raised included: burst watermain frequency at Forster
Park/Salthill and water outages: quality of reinstatements in particular at St, James Crescent water
pressure issues at Monivea Park deficiency at Merlin Park pumping station and impact of this on
growth and development particularly in the east of the city; risk to supply during drought; spare
capacity to South Connemara; clarity regarding works at Long Walk; Ballyloughane water quality
and request for a report on works completed and if ban will be lifted in 2021; payments from Irish
Water; educational programmes; issue of wet wipes in the Corrib and Claddagh area and request
for a report on investigations into same and the cost to run treatment to Mutton Island from the
Eastside as opposed to a new treatment plant in the East.
Ms. E. Fanning and the Chief Executive responded to queries raised in detail. Ms. Fanning advised
that she will issue reports as requested by Councillors. Mr. McGrath thanked Ms. Fanning and
complimented the work of the Water Services team.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
171 Page
'That Galway City Council requests Irish Waterto bring forward the necessary plans and finance
in 2021 to upgrade the public water supply in Forster Park, Salthill and end the ongoing water
outages being encountered by the residents of Forster Park.'
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
4(a) Chief Executive's Report:
i. July 2020 Noted
ii. September 2020 Noted
Councillor discussed the July and September Chief Executive's Reports jointly. Matters raised
included: a request for an update on the stimulus package and delivery of projects; concern
regarding rates collection for 2021 and query if any updates from Government; the Park & Stride
project was complimented with a request for footpaths from Westside to Bushy Park school;
request that attention be given to footpath removed on the N59; discussion regarding the Restart
Business Grant 2; EIS natura impact statement on the Salmon Weir bridge, publication of part 8
in Q3 and bus road corridor consultation put out to October; scaling down of the Mobility Team
operations and consultation with businesses; consultation process unclear, reference to the
carbon tax application and query if any other sources for funding; Bearna greenway; is there a
plan for a pilot greenway on the Promenade; request for a school warden; lighting project from
Blackrock to caravan park query if any planning issues with Special Area of Conservation; parking
enforcement and query if fine can be posted following an offence; Rahoon burial ground
extension costings; 2020 centenary of significant events in the city; Monksfield and Westbrook
tennis courts; upgrade request for McGraths field; Millars lane temporary lighting request; query
if houses at High Road, Ballybane will be bungalow style; retrofit at Glenbaun welcomed;
procurement of contractors; Development Plan; consultation with Salthill businesses on mobility
plans; compliments on achieving green flag award for the Children's Millennium and the
Quincentennial Parks; tender for Martin roundabout re-advertised query if any delay in quarter
one next year; any further presentations on cycleways in Salthill, Merlin tennis club seeking
consultation with Parks Department; timeframe for energy retrofit and when will phase 2
commence i.e. Tulach Ard; Corrib Park and requirement for footpaths on Circular Road.
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries raised. Mayor Cubbard requested a response
in writing to queries that were not addressed.
4(b) Quarterly Report, April to June 2020: Not Considered
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing
Environment & Climate Change
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
181 Page
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty submitted a Notice of Motion as follows.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
'l call on the Parks, Recreation and Amenity Departments to reverse its decision not to
collect the bags of grass cuttings etc., left out for collection in bags which were provided
by the City Council, but which are now left lying in the green areas in a number of estates
throughout the city. I'm also requesting that this service should continue indefinitely, to
facilitate the works carried out by the Community Employment Scheme participants
throughout the year, as has been the case up to now.'
Mayor Cubbard advised that this Motion could be left on the Agenda and considered at the
Special meeting to consider Notices of Motions on Monday 5th October 2020.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
3 no. Notices of Motion were carried forward from the June Council Meetings as follows:
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the
City that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday
to encourage people to come into the city.'
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 6th July 2020
Propose that Galway city Council liaise with NUI Galway with a view to
introducing/discussing the potential for a temporary park and ride facility at Corrib Village
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund
scheme specifically for aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately:
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence
Forces.
191 Page
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force
personnel.
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that
her Department acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees
access their personal information regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the
equality and personal autonomy rights of other citizens in Ireland.
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020
marking the centenary of the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred
in Galway during 1920 including but not exclusive to:
• The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke
in September 1920.
• The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
• The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
• The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
• The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces."
NOM 43/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and
the Minister of State for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special
responsibility for Equality, Immigration and Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the
closure of all Galway based Direct Provision Centres and instead, offer residents suitable,
community-based accommodation and services for children and families.
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries
warning about the danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure
to electromagnetic radiation, that GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the
environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on CommReg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
20 | Page
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a
working group to establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and
human health due to the current questionable scientific knowledge. "
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals
etc. and all workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of
organising meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would
explore effective actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River
Corrib.
NOM 69/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th December 2019
Galway City Council calls to expand the remit of IPB Insurance to provide public liability
insurance, at an affordable rate, to community events and festivals that are otherwise
unable to source affordable insurance. We also call on other local authorities, Regional
Assemblies and ETBs to also ask for this motion to be supported.
NOM 05/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 27th January 2020
That Galway City Council call on the Minister with responsibilities for local government to
hold a plebiscite vote on a proposal for a directly elected Mayor with executive functions.
NOM 06/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 27th February 2020
That Galway City Council contacts the Board of NUI Galway requesting them to reverse the
recent decision to impose a 4% increase in on-campus accommodation for the academic
year 20/21. This sets out the wrong message and directly contradicts the NUI Strategic Plan
20-25 which prioritises the provision of affordable and sustainable on campus
accommodation for its students.
NOM 07/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 21st April 2020
Galway City Council agrees to establish a Business Forum which is constituted by all relevant
stakeholders. The Forum will plan Galway's response to and, exit from, Covid19 with the
intention of protecting local businesses. The Forum agrees to have its first meeting at the
earliest opportunity.
21 | Page
NOM 08/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the
hospitality industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.
NOM 12/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 17th May 2020
I am calling on Galway City Council to waiver the outdoor Licence fees for businesses with
outdoor seating and tables until December 20/20 to give pubs, restaurants and cafes the
opportunity to get back into positive cashflow. The application will apply as always but no
fees will be charged.
NOM 15/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 2nd July 2020
That Galway City Council calls on the Government to legislate, for the outlawing of the
purchase of mobile phones, SIM cards, electronic communication devices etc. without a
valid form of identification.
NOM 18/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt September 2020
That this Council calls on the government to bring forward legislation requiring all
employers by law to make provision for sick leave, i.e., paid time off from work for workers
when they are all ill. Also to amend the Parental Leave Act 1998, (force majeure leave) with
a new provision. In such a case an employee who is the parent or adoptive parent ofa child
shall be entitled to force majeure leave where and for so long as the child is unable to
attend the school or pre-school, if the presence of the employee is required at his or her
home in order to care for that child.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 3/2020
Question given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 7th September 2020
Can a report issue to Councillors regarding the following: (1) Number of hours worked in
overtime by Outdoor Council Staff in Environment charged with litter collection for the year
2019/Jan-present 2020? (2) What is the cost of overtime worked for those periods? (3) What
is the difference and cost of scheduled timetable hours for staff for those periods versus
overtime? (4) What is the explanation for overtime approved? (5) Following my motion to
Council to provide a costing of dealing with illegal dumping in the City - has this been done?
How is the costing carried out and analysed and can you include those details in the report?
Initial Reply issued with Agenda 9th September 2020
22 | Page
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
None
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The Meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
23 | Page
