Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14th October, 2019
at 12.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, Colette Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, F. Fahy, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, M.
O'Connor, and P. O'Reilly.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
Mr. D. Mahon, Director of Services
A. Ruane, Administrative Officer
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms
F. Kearney, Information Officer
Ms.
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllrs. John Connolly, P. Keane, T. O'Flaherty
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 12.00pm by welcoming Members, and proposing an adjournment in
order to deal with continuing business from the workshop prior to the Special Meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Motion to adjourn the Special Meeting until 12.20pm.
The Motion was agreed.
At 12.25pm, the Meetings Administrator advised Members that the Chamber would be set up for the
meeting, which would take a few minutes.
The Mayor recommenced the meeting at 12.31pm, with a Motion to express the sympathies of the
Chamber for Cllr. Colette Connolly and the Connolly family, for the loss of her brother Thomas. This was
seconded by Cllr. O.Crowe and agreed by all.
Item
Dat Rece
140 Motio
th septe be 2019
The followi g Councillors ca n
nder ection 140 of the Local Government Act 2001 to end
the
nt ractice of the Executive to refuse pa ing permits to Residents in Claddagh on the basis that
they have a driveway.
Signed by: Cllr. Colette Connolly, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr.
P. O'Reilly, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. M. O'Connor, Cllr. D.
McDonnell, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N.
Larkin, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. O. Crowe
& Cllr. J. Connolly.
The Mayor invited contributions from Proposer, Cllr. Colette Connolly, and Seconder, Cllr. O. Crowe.
1 IP age
Comments and questions from Cllr. Collette Connolly and Cllr. O. Crowe included:
Parking Bye-Laws 2009; reference to driveways in the Bye-Laws; Report on Permits on the September 2019
Ordinary Meeting Agenda; reinstatement of permits; issues arising in early 2018; working group for
permits; commercial activity; review of Bye-Laws; City Development Plan.
Clarifications from other Members included:
Tarmac driveways; executive functions; interpretation of Bye-Laws.
The Chief Executive clarified that a specific motion was in front of Council, and only that Motion could be
discussed. The Report on Parking Permits, issued on the 4th September 2019 for the September Ordinary
Meeting on Monday 9th September 2019 had not been dealt with at that meeting, and so remained on the
Agenda for the October Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council.
The Chief Executive responded to Members' clarifications comprehensively, and advised Members that the
Motion was served pursuant to Section 140, during the September 2019 Ordinary Meeting of Galway City
Council, and he had fully complied with the requirements of the act, once served.
The Chief Executive advised the members that the proposed section 140 is in his opinion, contrary to the
provisions of the act and may be ultra vires.
The Chief Executive also advised that he was in agreement with Councillors about the requirement to
review the Bye-Laws, and would allocate resources for this to be included in the 2020 work programme.
The Report of the 4th of September 2019 on Parking Permits and the accompanying CE Order to reinstate 35
permits which had been refused on the basis of applicants having a driveway, made this Motion
unnecessary and superfluous.
The meeting concluded at 1.07pm.
Minutes, Confirmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
21 Page