Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14th December, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
at Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Councillor C. Connolly
McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. B.
McNally, Director of Services
Ms. R.
Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. D.
Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. B.
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. T.
. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms C.
Silke, Administrative Officer
Ms. E.
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. A.
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms. G.
O'Neill & Mr. A. Kelly, Land Development Agency
Mr. p.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He reminded attendees to adhere to social distancing and to wear face coverings when
moving about the facility.
Mayor Cubbard referred to a request from the transportation department to defer Item no. 2(c),
this request is due to legal advice received and the department have advised that the matter will be
revisited in the New Year. Councillors considered the matter and agreed to defer the agenda item.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (c) Declaration of roads to be public roads - Fionnuisce Estate (part)
Deferred
Mayor Cubbard advised that Mr. A. Kelly and Mr. P. O'Neill from the Land Development Agency
(LDA) will be joining the meeting virtually and requested that Agenda Item No. 4(d) Sandy Road
Regeneration & Dyke Road Opportunity Sites be considered first when dealing with agenda items
under Consideration of Reports of Officials. This was proposed by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and seconded
by Cllr. F. Fahy and agreed.
Mi
s, Con r -ed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 9th November & Adjournment of meetings held
on 16th and 23rd November
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to Adopt Item I(a) - Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 9th November &
Adjournment meetings held on 16th and 23rd November.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Matters Arising
Cllr. M. J. Crowe referred to NOM 28/2020 regarding the implementation of assurances to the
Collins family. Councillors discussed the matter and it was agreed to take a roll call vote on the
motion.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator took a Roll Call Vote on the motion as follows:
NOM 28/2020
Submitted under SO 34 at the September Council Meeting. Request to leave on the Agenda at
the October Council meeting.
Proposed by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
'That Galway City Council immediately move to implement the assurances given to the Collins
Family before, during and after the 'Kirwan Roundabout Part VIII Process'. These assurances were
given both publicly and privately. Despite this the family have largely been ignored and this needs
to be urgently addressed.'
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D.
Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis , Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
I(b) Galway City Council Budget Meeting held on 30th November 2020
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Motion to Adopt Item I(b) - Galway City Council Budget Meeting held on 30th November 2020.
This was agreed and the Minutes were adopted.
Matters Arising
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to the budget meeting and raised the issue of rates and that the
amount of debtors carried forward into 2021 will be substantial.
2
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Filling of Board membership of Üdarés na hOlIscoile na hÉireann, Gaillimh (NUI, Galway)
Proposed by: Cllr. M. O'Connor Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Motion to propose Cllr. N. Murphy to the board of Üdarås na hOllscoile na hÉireann, Gaillimh (NUI,
Galway).
This was agreed.
2(b) Part 8 Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) — Residential development
at Ballybaan More, Galway
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer gave a presentation to Council on the proposed Old Monivea
Road Social Housing Scheme (An Cliathån). He outlined the location; site layout; key plan; scheme
layout including 3D views of the development which is divided into two blocks:
Block 1: contains 12 no. sheltered housing 2-bed 3 person apartments and
Block 2: contains 3 no. 3-bed 5 person apartments for families with special needs which are fully
accessible units and include universal design standards. Mr. Prendergast outlined the proposed
delivery programme for the units.
Councillors discussed the proposal and matters raised included: request for all Councillors to be
briefed on part 8 developments; designation of car spaces per unit; visitor parking; payment method
for communal segregated waste; tender process; City Council contribution and grant payments
received for the development; agreement of a higher wall height at side of the development;
confirmation that there will be no overlooking on existing houses; downsizing for local residents, bus
stop within walking distance, accessibility; status of access officer; other similar developments in the
city and timescales on same; different coloured doors to assist the visually impaired and risk
assessment measures for flood mitigation.
Mr. T. Prendergast and Mr. D. Mahon responded to queries and clarifications raised in detail and
advised that suggestions given by Councillors will be considered further. It was confirmed that the
Council considers the most advantageous tender and this did not necessarily mean the lowest tender
price.
Following the proposal and seconding of the approval of Item 2(b), Mayor Cubbard sought the
approval of all Councillors. This was agreed unanimously.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approval of Part 8 Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) — Residential
development at Ballybaan More, Galway' — per Reports issued on 9th and 11th December 2020.
Item 2(b) was approved unanimously.
3
2(d) Section 183 - Proposed disposal of land / premises by way of lease at Carnmore, Co. Galway
Following the proposal and seconding of the approval of Item 2(d), Mayor Cubbard sought the
approval of all Councillors. This was agreed unanimously.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Section 183 - Proposed disposal of land / premises by way of lease at Carnmore, Co. Galway -
per Report issued on 9th December 2020.
This was approved unanimously.
2(e) Three Year Capital Programme 2021 - 2023
Councillors discussed the three year capital programme. Matters raised included whether certain
capital projects could be prioritised for the remainder of the current Council.
Cllr. O'Flaherty proposed a zoom meeting to discuss the document. This was seconded by Cllr. C.
Connolly. However, following discussion on the matter this proposal was withdrawn.
The Chief Executive advised that he will be preparing a submission to Government on the matter
relating to agenda item 4(e) Review to Renew - Review of the National Development Plan -
Consultation process.
Councillors debated deferring the agenda item until January 2021. Cllr. O. Hanley proposed that a
Special meeting be held on Monday 21st December at 3pm in Leisureland. This was seconded by
Cllr. F. Fahy.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator took a roll call vote on the matter:
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Hanley Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To have a Special Meeting on Monday 21st December at 3pm in Leisureland to discuss the Three
Year Capital Programme 2021 - 2023.
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. C. Higgins,
Cllr. D. Lyon &, Cllr. N. Murphy
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. E. Hoare,
Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Abstain: Cllr. M. O'Connor
In Favour: 7 Against: 10 Abstain: 1
Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
To note the Three Year Capital Programme 2021 - 2023 and to make a submission to the review
of the National Development Plan based on same.
This was agreed.
4
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Mayor Cubbard proposed the noting of items 3(a) and 3(b). This was agreed.
3(a) Draft note Corporate Policy Group Budget Meeting held on 20th November 2020
Draft note Corporate Policy Group Budget Meeting held on 20th November 2020 were noted.
3(b) Draft note of Joint Corporate Policy Group Meeting with Galway County Council held on
20th November 2020
Draft note of Joint Corporate Policy Group Meeting with Galway County Council held on 20th
November 2020 were noted.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(d) Sandy Road Regeneration & Dyke Road Opportunity Sites - To receive update on the project
Charters
Mr. McGrath, Chief Executive gave an update to Councillors on a proposed project initiation route
map in relation to the development opportunity that exists in relation to the City Council's owned
land at Dyke Road and also other publically owned land banks at Sandy Road, which can also include
other lands not in public ownership. Mr. McGrath confirmed that both proposed projects will be
separate and distinct and that the project methodologies will vary between the two projects.
Mr. McGrath advised that there will be some similar elements within each project. Mr. McGrath
informed the meeting that it is proposed that both projects will proceed from Stage Zero (where
they presently reside) to stage Three which will culminate in planning applications for the
appropriate regulatory consents. The document issued to Councillors has been the subject of the
three separate discussions with the Corporate Policy Group which took place on 25th September
2020, 12th November 2020 and 08th December 2020. Mr. McGrath confirmed that all of the key
steps in the proposed processes will come before the City Council for decision at the appropriate
time.
Councillors discussed the proposed projects and matters raised included: compliments to the CE on
the development of these projects; potential for commercial rates for the sites; linkage to the
Connemara greenway; Clifden railway bridge; URDF funding; enabling legislation for role of LDA;
floodplains and embankment; Ireland's Catchment Flood Risk Assessment and Management
(CFRAMS) and responsibility for tendering of works; process of breakdown/ratio of housing
elements i.e. social, affordable, business and retention of residential elements; spatial framework;
affordable housing costs; private investment; post COVID potentially reduced need for office space;
democratic deficit on progression of project without briefing to all Councillors; vacant site
possession; current affordable housing loan balances; provision of public facilities for Arts and
Culture; concert hall; theatre and dance facility; methodology for multi-storey car park and public
consultation.
5
The Chief Executive and Mr. A. Kelly, Land Development Agency responded to Councillors queries
and clarifications.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote on the matter:
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
'To formally propose to proceed with arrangements for the process through which Sandy Road
Regeneration & Dyke Road Opportunity Sites projects will be developed — per document issued
11th December 2020'.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons,
Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis , Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Against: Cllr. C. Connolly
In Favour: 16 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
4(a) Galway City Council Sports Club Grants 2020 and the Minority Sports & Physical Activity
Grants 2020
Councillors discussed the Galway City Council Sports Club Grants 2020 and the Minority Sports &
Physical Activity Grants 2020. A query was raised as to whether a motion had been raised and
approved in the past that the grants come before Council for approval rather than for noting.
The Meetings Administrator advised that he would examine if there was such a motion passed.
Mayor Cubbard proposed the noting of items 4(a). This was agreed.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To note the Galway City Council Sports Club Grants 2020 and the Minority Sports & Physical
Activity Grants 2020.
This was agreed.
4(b) Chief Executive's Report:
(i) November 2020 — Not Considered
(ii) December 2020 — Not Considered
4(c) Water Framework Directive — Presentation on the EPA Water Quality Report
Not Considered
4(e) Review to Renew - Review of the National Development Plan — Consultation process
Not Considered.
6
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising
meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective
actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib.
NOM 8/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 4th May 2020
Galway City Council agrees to designate public areas specifically for the use of the hospitality
industry while adhering to social distancing guidelines and best practice.'
NOM 19/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Date Received: 24th September 2020
'That GCC call on the Government to extend the Rates Waiver for an additional six months.'
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended medals
to the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat Quinlan
recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have yet to be
awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to make this a
priority.'
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
NOM 22/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
'That an urgent safety assessment be carried out on Dominick Street and remedial works be
carried out to mitigate danger to the significantly increased number of residents, particularly
families with young children.'
7
NOM 23/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 10th June 2020
'Galway City Council agrees to explore sources of funding so the Barna Greenway can be
progressed.'
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the City
that parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to
encourage people to come into the city.'
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines
for Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a local
ward will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area committee,
to enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate at which that
portion is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the LPT variation
rate is decided.'
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling
network across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle
network currently happening across the city'.
6. QUESTIONS
Question 05/2020
Given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 6th November 2020
A recent review by the Department of Expenditure and Reform examining social housing
build programmes in local authorities including Galway City Council released recently found
it can be up to 30% more cost efficient for local authorities to build their own social housing
rather than buy ready built 'turnkey' units; where did Galway City Council fall in this report
and how will these findings influence our priority in increasing supply of public housing.
Response issued on 11th December 2020.
8
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 16th October 2020 from Kerry County Council
(b) Correspondence dated 29th October 2020 from Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage
— Budget 2021 and Housing Delivery
(c) Correspondence dated 6th November 2020 from Sligo County Council
(d) Correspondence dated 9th November 2020 from the office of Minister Roderic ÜGorman TD in reply
to NOM 34/2019 (Cllr. Mike Cubbard)
(e) Correspondence dated 9th November 2020 from the office of Minister Roderic O'Gorman TD in reply
to NOM 43/2019 (Cllr. Owen Hanley)
(f) Correspondence dated 12th November 2020 from the Department of Housing, Local Government &
Heritage in reply to NOM 5/2020 (Cllr. Owen Hanley)
(g) Correspondence dated 12th November 2020 from Carlow County Council (h) Correspondence dated
19th November 2020 from Office of the Minister for Defence and Minister for Foreign Affairs in reply to
NOM 26/2019 (Cllr. John Connolly)
(i) Correspondence dated 27th November 2020 from IPB Insurance in reply to NOM 69/2019 (Cllr. Niall
McNelis
(j) Correspondence dated 30th November 2020 from Galway County Council, motion passed by Members
9. CONFERENCES
Correspondence were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and noted.
1. Title: Social Media Dublin 21
Date: 28th January 2021
Venue: Online
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy/Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Mayor
Cubbard.
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Cllr. N. McNelis referred to a Notice of Motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business which
was submitted to the Meetings Administrator under Standing Order 34.
Mayor Cubbard agreed to deal with the motion.
9
Cllr. D. Lyons declared that he is an employee of An Post and would not be participating in a decision
on this motion. This was noted.
Mr. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to read the motion.
Councillors considered the motion and agreed to approve same.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
"Galway City Council calls upon the Minister for Climate Action, Communications Networks and
Transport, Mr. Eamon Ryan, T.D, the Minister of Finance, Paschal Donoghoe T.D and the Minister
for Public Expenditure and Reform, Michael McGrath T.D to urgently enact the private members'
motion previously passed in November 2016 by the previous Government regarding the future of
the Post Office Network. This is a matter of urgency to ensure the sustainability of our existing
community Post Office Network."
Supported by:
Cllrs. M. Cubbard, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. McDonnell, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty.
The Motion was approved.
Mayor Cubbard and the Chief Executive thanked all for their contributions during a very challenging
year and wished all a safe and Happy New Year.
The meeting concluded at 4.55 p.m.
10