Minutes of Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Friday
156' June, 2015, at 6.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presidin :
Present:
010 ies:
In Attendance:
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron; Cathal Ö Conchüir; Catherine Connolly;
M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; M. Farrell; P. Flannery; P.
Keane; N. Larkin; D. Lyons; A. Marley; D. McDonnell; N.
McNelis; T. O'Flaherty & J. Walsh.
Cllr. O. Crowe
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Mr. D. Mahon, Meetings Administrator,
Mr. G. McMahon A/Senior Executive Officer
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Mayor D. Lyons proposed the suspension of Standing Orders for the duration of the
meeting to permit members of the press and media photograph and film proceedings.
This was agreed by the members.
Mayors Opening Address
The Mayor welcomed the large attendance present at the meeting to the Council
Chamber. He then referred to his year as Mayor of the City of Galway and that he was
very honoured to have been given the chains of office for a second time and it was his
great honour to represent the City of Galway at a huge number of events locally,
nationally and internationally throughout the year.
In particular he highlighted the following events:
During the year, he welcomed 9 Ambassadors to City Hall including Austrian,
Italian, Argentinian, Chinese, Croatian, Estonian, French, Japanese, Mexican and
the United States Ambassador whose residence he attended for an event with a
number of Galway business people and the Chief Executive.
Galway's designation as UNESCO City of Film
Official openings of Westside Amenity Facilities, the Community Centre at
Cappagh Park, turning the first sod for the new community centre at Ballinfoile
and the reopening of the Leisureland Complex
Galway achieving Purple Flag status
Progressing Galway's European Capital of Culture 2020 bid
Attending numerous community events and seeing the immense efforts of
volunteers in the community
Hosting the Mayor's Awards 2015 and honouring the unsung heroes who do
trojan work within their communities
He recalled the visits he had undertaken overseas on behalf of the city including
trips to some of Galway's sister cities and seeing the respect Galway holds
internationally and seeing the benefit of these relationships to Galway
Awarding the Freedom of the City to Mr. Billy Lawless who is one of Galway's
greatest supporters and who has become a beacon for the undocumented Irish
and other nationalities in the United States as well as his involvement as Vice
Chairman of the Galway Chicago Sister Cities Committee
The visit of Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall to our city. The royal
visit put Galway centre stage internationally and the positive publicity gained
from the visit will no doubt be to Galway's benefit going forward.
In conclusion, Mayor Lyons wished his successor all the best for the coming year. He
paid tribute to the Chief Executive and to City Council staff for their support over the
year. In particular, he paid tribute to Ms Orlaith Lawless in the Mayor's Office and Mr
Donal Leonard, the driver of the Mayoral car, for their support, professionalism and
patience. He went on to thank Cllr. John Walsh for his work and support as Deputy
Mayor and thanked the Elected Members for their work with him based on the best
interests of the city. He also thanked his family, his wife Myra and daughters Ciara and
Ailbhe for all their help, support and understanding during the year.
Councillors then paid tribute to Cllr. Lyons and congratulated him on the manner in
which he carried out his duties during the past year.
In particular, members
congratulated Cllr Lyons on his professionalism, for facilitating all requests, promoting
the city locally, nationally and internationally, promoting Galway's bi-lingual status, for
his fair and balanced chairmanship of meetings and his dealings with the elected
members, for his advice to new members, and his personal energy and drive to
promote the City.
The Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath congratulated Cllr. Lyons on a very successful
Mayoralty in a challenging office and wished him and his family well. tn particular, Mr.
McGrath praised Cllr. Lyon's diligence, loyalty and professional approach to the
position of Mayor.
Election of Mayor
1.
The following nominations were made for the office of Mayor.
Cllr. Frank Fahy was proposed by Cllr. P. Flannery and seconded by Cllr. J. Walsh.
Cllr. Fahy, as the only member nominated for the position of Mayor, was formally
elected Mayor of the City of Galway and he then proceeded to take the chair for the
remainder of the meeting.
2
On taking the chair, the Mayor Cllr. Fahy thanked Cllrs. Flannery and Walsh for their
nomination of him as Mayor and fellows Councillors for electing him as Mayor.
The Mayor referred to the great honour it was for him to be elected Mayor of the City
of Ga;way. He welcomed his wife Geraldine, his children, extended family, friends and
supporters to the Chamber and thanked them for their help and support. He also paid
tribute to outgoing Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons and outgoing Deputy Mayor Cllr. J. Walsh.
He went on to set out his priorities for the year, including:
The promotion of arts, heritage and tourism in the city and the region
Progressing of the European Capital of Culture 2020 bid
Celebrating the centenary of Éiri Amach na Césta 1916.
Progressing a dedicated school transport service for the city
Greater promotion of Galway Sister Cities relationships
Promoting the use of the Irish Language and Galway as a bj-lingual city
Enhancement of the Canals around the city
Councillors and outgoing Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons congratulated the Mayor on his election
and wished him well in his period as Mayor. Members noted the significant vote
Mayor Fahy had received in the recent local elections and commended his hard work
and diligence as an elected representative for the City.
The Chief Executive also joined with Councillors in congratulating the Mayor and
assured him of his and the staff of City Council's support throughout the coming year.
Election of Deputy Mayor
2.
The following nomination was made for the office of Deputy Mayor.
Cllr. Niall McNelis was proposed by Cllr. B. Cameron and seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell. There were no other nominations and Cllr. McNelis was declared elected.
Cllr McNelis thanked his proposer and seconder and the Members for the great honour
conferred on him. He also thanks outgoing Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons and Mayor F. Fahy and
stated he looked forward to working closely with the Mayor on a range of initiatives
including the 2020 Bid, promotion of arts, heritage, small business, suicide awareness
initiatives and the overall promotion of the city.
The elected members congratulated Cllr. McNelis on being elected Deputy Mayor and
wished him well in the role. They also complimented outgoing Deputy Mayor, Cllr. J.
Walsh on his year as Deputy Mayor. The Chief Executive also congratulated Cllr.
McNelis and Cllr. Walsh on his own behalf and on behalf of staff.
Cllr. J. Walsh thanked the members for their support during the year and thanked
outgoing Mayor Lyons for his support.
3
3.
Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
Galway Civic Trust
Appointment of Two (2) Members (for a period of one year)
It was proposed by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty that Cllrs. B. Cameron and F. Fahy be elected to
Galway Civic Trust.
This motion was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
(b)
Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd
Appointment of One (1) Member (for a period of one year).
It was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin that Cllr. McDonnell be elected to Irish Public Bodies
Mutual Insurances Ltd.
The motion was seconded by Cllr. McNelis and agreed.
4.
To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
Mayor Fahy noted the schedule of Ordinary Meetings for the year and advised
members of the agreement to conduct the July meeting one week earlier on the 6tn
July.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons, seconded by Cllr. P. Conneely and agreed that
Ordinary Meetings would be held on the second Monday of each month, except for the
month of August.
The meeting adjourned at 7.15pm.
4