Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
A olo ies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Tuesday 16th April 2019,
at 9.30am in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N.
Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty, and J. Walsh.
. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr B.
Connell, Director of Services
Mr. T.
McNally, Director of Services
Ms. R.
Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr. D.
Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms. N.
Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms. C.
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. T.
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr.
H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner
C. O'Riordan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
P. Staunton, Executive Planner
E. Silke, A/ Administration Officer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
. A. Finn, A/ Administration Officer
Ms
. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms
N/A
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The meeting commenced at 9.33am.
Mr Gary McMahon, Meetings Administrator, declared the meeting open with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders, followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
The Mayor thanked Members for their attendance, and advised that the meeting would break at
11.00am for 15 minutes; at 1.15pm for 45 minutes; and at 3.30pm if Members wished to break at this
time, The meeting would end at 6.00pm. The Mayor advised Members that the Mayor's Awards would
take place in the evening, and welcomed all to attend.
Item 2 (a) Consideration of Part XI of the Planning & Development Act 2000 - 2018
and Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2000 to 2018 — Proposed
development of 58 residential units at Ballybaan More, Galway, east of the old
Ballybaan Road and Rocklands Avenue and south of the Monivea Road.
The Mayor invited Mr. T. Prendergast and Mr. P. Staunton to report on the proposed development under
consideration.
Queries and comments from Members included:
Social Schemes in the East/ West of the City; management of estates; affordable housing schemes;
housing density; wardens; transfers; access and exits; homeless families; gardens/ private amenity for
units; assigned parking spaces; lighting; consultation with residents/ Local Area Councillors; bins;
communal space; Rebuilding Ireland; National Planning Framework; loans to build Affordable Housing;
verandas and conditions of use; covered cycle parking; bus shelters; vacant housing stock.
Cllr. M. J. Crowe advised the Mayor that a Motion would be tabled from the East Area Local
Representatives regarding a mix of housing for the site.
Mr. D. Mahon responded comprehensively to Members queries. Mr Mahon advised Members that the
Department had issued Affordable Housing Scheme Allocation guidelines and required Local Authorities
to adopt a scheme by the 18th June 2019. The scheme would set out eligible households where the Local
Authority has homes to dispose of, under the scheme. A copy of the guidelines would issue to the
Housing SPC next week, and come before Council at the May meeting. Mr. D. Mahon advised Members
that even with adoption of the Guidelines, there is no Affordable Housing scheme in place to make
houses available for sale at present. The scheme proposed under item 2 (a) is funded through the SHIP
scheme, and could not be part-funded through any other mechanism. Any change in the mix of tenure
proposed would put the funding at risk, as the Department has required a 100% social housing mix. Mr.
D. Mahon advised members that a sustainable mix is desirable, and gave an overview of targets and
proposed locations for housing at the April Ordinary Meeting. Sanction was received this week for an
additional post to assist with Estate Management. The role would have a specific remit regarding
enforcement and resettling families moving to facilitate refurbishments taking place.
Mr. T. Prendergast responded comprehensively to Members queries regarding the proposed
development. Mr. T. Prendergast advised Members that the development density is in line with the
National Development Plan, and consistent with the Transport Strategy. Short roadways and Home
Zones with narrow roads were in accordance with DMURS, to discourage speed, and to promote
permeability and reduce Cul de Sacs. Parking is not assigned, in line with the City Development Plan.
Lighting will be considered in conjunction with Recreation and Amenity, in order to ensure no loss of
amenity with light pollution for existing residents. Bin storage for three bins will be provided for all units.
Communal space will include a playground and a multi-use games area, with planning permission to be
sought for the final design. The open space was provided at the corner of the site as a beneficial use of
the space, as it is too narrow for housing.
Mr. D. Mahon advised Members that if the Part VIII is rejected, no development at all would take place
on the site. A part VIII planning permission will be required whether the mix is social housing, or a mix
of other tenures, including affordable housing. A review of anti-social behaviour will take place as part
of the Estate Management Strategy passed by Council, and would be presented to the Housing SPC in
September. Mr. D. Mahon advised members that Galway City Council has an obligation to provide
shelter to families regardless of their behaviour.
At 11.04, the Mayor left the Chair, and Deputy Mayor, Cllr. Donal Lyons, took the chair.
Mr. B. McGrath asked Members to consider the fundamental question, is it good planning to build 58
homes on this land? Mr. B. McGrath advised that the Planning and Housing sections of Galway City
Council recommended the proposed development go ahead. Tenure could be decided at another time,
but the SHIP funding is solely for the provision of social housing. Galway City Council is struggling to
meet the needs of homeless and other families, this development would respond to housing targets, in
an area with no land dept.
At 11.05am, the Mayor resumed the Chair.
21 Page
Cllr N. Larkin proposed that the proposed decision be deferred to the May Ordinary Meeting, to allow
the six Local Area Elected Representatives to meet with the Executive in the interim. Mr. D. Mahon
advised Members that no additional information on an Affordable Scheme would be available for the
May Ordinary Meeting.
Mr. B. McGrath advised the Mayor to bring the contents of two Motions tabled to the attention of
Members, in order to determine if a vote should be taken on them. Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings
Administrator, advised Members they must take the Motions, or defer them to consider Cllr. N. Larkin's
motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Supported by: Cllrs. N. Larkin, M.J. Crowe, M. Farrell
That Galway City Council redesign the Part VIII project for Ballybane with the following adjustments:
1. Reduce the density of houses to 50.
2. Redesign the plan and place the open space in the middle of the site.
3. The composition of the housing be 75% affordable housing and 25% social housing.
All of this is in the interest of balance and sustainable housing in the area.
Not considered. Deferred to May Ordinary Meeting.
Cllr. J. Walsh proposed an amendment to the Motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. J. Walsh
Seconded by: Cllr. P. Conneely
I would like to approve the Part VIII as proposed by the CE with the following stipulation. In the hope
that an affordable scheme is in place by the time these houses are constructed, the CE investigates
the possibility of a "Scheme of Allocation" where the Elected Members then decide the % allocation
between Social and Affordable.
Not considered. Deferred to May Ordinary Meeting.
Cllr. C. Connolly submitted an Amendment to Cllr. N. Larkin's Motion, and then withdrew the
Amendment to allow a Vote to be taken on the original Motion.
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly
I propose we proceed with the Part VIII as presented to Councillors with one condition to assign 58
units 1 specific car parking space.
The Motion was withdrawn.
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Larkin
Motion to defer the decision on Item 2 (a) to the May Ordinary Meeting, and for the Chief Executive
to meet with the six Local Area Representatives in between.
In favour: 9
31 Page
Against: 8
Abstain: O
Present: 17
At 11.34am, the Mayor advised Members that a break would be taken until 11.50am.
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Motion to break until 11.50am.
The motion was agreed unanimously.
The meeting resumed at 11.54am. The Mayor proposed to take Item 4(c) Proposed Variation to City
Development Plan.
Cllr. O. Crowe requested clarification on the format and agenda for the meeting. The Mayor advised Cllr.
O. Crowe of the proposed break and finish times, and the order of the agenda.
Mr. B. McGrath advised Members for information that a significant water issue on the Headford Road
was being dealt with by Galway City Council crews. It was envisaged that it would be concluded by
4.00pm.
The Mayor suspended the meeting at 12.01pm for five minutes, to allow Cllr. O. Crowe to withdraw
comments made. The Mayor resumed the meeting at 12.06pm, and advised Members that he was
running the Meeting Agenda in line with Standing Orders. Cllr. O. Crowe apologised if his tone implied
disrespect for the Office of the Mayor and withdrew the remark.
Item 4 (c) Proposed Variation to City Development Plan
Mr. B. McGrath reported on Item 4 (c) — Proposed Variation to the City Development Plan.
Queries and Comments from Members included:
New Planning Act; boundary of site; zoning; mapping error; planning permission.
Ms. C. Phelan summarised the reason for the Report to Members, and summarised the Minister's
comments from the Oireachtas and the 2018 Amendment to the Planning and Development Act, 2000.
Ms. C. Phelan advised Members that variations to a Development Plan remain an Executive function. If
the Chief Executive sees no merit in a proposed Variation, he is required to give Members a Report, as
circulated. This position has been historically vindicated by advice from Senior Counsel.
Ms. C. Phelan advised members that she had investigated the mapping showing RA land within a private
boundary wall and acknowledged the great exactitude of the Senior Technician who had drawn the map.
Ms. Phelan was satisfied, having investigated the history of the zoning that it is RA since 1991, with the
mapping, which in her opinion is correct. This reflects the evolution of the lands, with Ms. C. Phelan
referring to a previous CPO process and a deed of covenant which excludes building on the land. Ms. C.
Phelan advised Members that an evidence base was required to make a variation. Galway City Council
has sufficient lands for housing— albeit housing is not being built at present. In this context, there is no
evidence for use of a radical instrument to make a change to the land in Renmore.
Mr. B. McGrath advised members of the contents of Circular Letter PL 03/2019 issued on the 3rd of April
2019 regarding the Office of the Planning Regulator, which aims to ensure policy consistency between
the national, regional and local levels of the statutory planning policy hierarchy, which includes the
National Planning Framework, Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies, city/county development plans
and local area plans. Until the Regional and Spatial Planning Strategy is in place, Local Authorities are
generally not to amend Local Area Plans. Limited variations are permitted, but only in consultation with
the Office of the Planning Regulator.
41 page
The Mayor invited clarifications.
Clarifications from Members included:
Deed of covenant; power of the executive; relevance of Oireachtas minutes; zoning; density.
Ms. C. Phelan advised Members that the minutes of the Houses of the Oireachtas have huge credibility
and are supported by Legal Counsel quoted. Ms. C. Phelan reconfirmed that there was no mapping error.
Mr. B. McGrath also advised Members that Minister English's response in the Oireachtas is important
regarding the Amendment, which put a process in place to initiate a variation in a Development Plan. If
the Manager decides not to proceed, he must bring back a report explaining the process. The CPO put a
burden on the property. Like any agreement it could potentially be varied with the agreement of both
parties.
The Mayor advised Members that he had two Motions tabled and proceeded to take a vote.
Cllr. C. Connolly's Motion was an amendment to the Substantive Motion by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
I propose we go with the CEO's recommendation not to make a variation to the CPD in this case.
In favour: 4
Against: 11
Abstain: O
Present: 15
The Amendment to the Substantive Motion fell.
The Mayor read the original Motion, as amended:
Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
That we proceed with the process to zone the lands of Renmore as indicated in Motion, after
consultation with the Planning Regulator.
Mr. B. McGrath advised Members that legal opinion available to the Council is that the issue does not to
proceed any further, as made clear by the Senior Planner, Ms. C. Phelan. Mr B. McGrath advised that
legal advice could be sought in the context of the recent updating of the legislation, but he did not
recommend this course of action.
A discussion on the Motion ensued.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
I propose we sent the Motion for further legal opinion before being voted on and be brought back to
Council.
In favour: 7
Abstain: 1
Against: 7
Present: 15
As there was an equality of votes, the Mayor exercised his casting vote in favour.
The Motion was passed.
At lpm, the Mayor advised Members that Item 4(d) Såilin to Silverstrand Project Update and 4 (f) Update
on Galway Transportation Strategy including Galway City Centre Traffic Management Plan and Shop
Street Refurbishment would be taken after a recess for lunch. The meeting would resume at 1.45pm.
51 Page
The Meeting went into Recess at 1.00pm.
The Meeting resumed at 1.55pm when a quorum was reached.
Item 4 (d) Såilin to Silverstrand Project Update
Ms. C. Kilcoyne reported on the Såilin to Silverstrand Project, and outlined the history of the project. Ms.
C. Kilcoyne advised Members that consultants had been appointed to progress the project, and to
investigate if the planning permission originally granted was still valid as the original proposed location of
the bridges, and the size of the revetments, were amended to reduce environmental impact. Ms. C.
Kilcoyne committed to sending Members clearer pictures of the map previously circulated.
Comments and questions from Members included:
Frustration at the delay in progression; erosion and studies of the Drumlin; correspondence/ meetings
with the Department; negative environmental impact of proposed route; alternative routes; funding;
European Court Ruling 2014.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne responded comprehensively to Members' queries, and advised that Consultants were
investigating if the original planning permission was still valid. Ms. C. Kilcoyne advised against reverting
to the original design granted planning permission, as it would have to go through another Natura
assessment, and the revised design had less potential impact on the environment.
Mr. B. McGrath advised Members that after the European Court Judgement, all development must have
regard for the Habitats Directive. This project was designed as a coastal protection scheme, which is not
within the core powers of Galway City Council. Funding of previously estimated €12 - €15 million would
have to be sourced from an appropriate funding agency, while Galway City Council could fund the
recreation and amenity element. It is probable that the original estimates will have increased in the
interim.
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
I propose we defer Item 4 (d) Såilin to Silverstrand Project Update until the Consultant's Report is
complete, in order to discuss the full information at the May Council Meeting.
The Motion was agreed unanimously.
Item 4 (f) Update on Galway Transportation Strategy including Galway City
Centre Traffic Management Plan and Shop Street Refurbishment
Mr. U. Finn gave Members a report on the Galway Transportation Strategy including Galway City Centre
Traffic Management Plan and Shop Street Refurbishment. Mr. U. Finn advised Members that the update
would overlap with quarterly reports, and be supplemented with a further report from Arup. Mr. U. Finn
gave updates including Bus Connects Galway and GTS projects including the Martin Roundabout and
Ardaun access, Wolfe Tone pedestrian bridge improvements, Dublin and Tuam Road bus priority, Kirwin
Roundabout, Parkmore, Galway Cycling Network and Salmon Weir Bridge.
Mr. Clifford Killeen, Senior Traffic Engineer, Arup, reported on City Centre elements including Bus
Connects.
The Mayor invited comments and questions.
6 IP age
Questions from Members included:
Location of Salmon Weir pedestrian bridge; pedestrian crossings at Wolfe Tone Bridge; Tuam Road land
acquisition; Kirwin Roundabout judicial review; control of access to College Road; Connacht Rugby traffic
management; public consultation; bus stops and shelters; maintenance of lights; capstone on Salmon Weir
Bridge; Spanish Arch; bus route review; traffic lights at Seamus Quirke Road; Aldi junction in Westside;
Park and Ride locations; Ring Road progress; bus service from Knocknacarra to Parkmore; Roscam exit;
cycle route to Oranmore railway from Roscam; Luas to Parkmore; traffic plans for new factories in Mervue;
Bothar na mBan; Martin Roundabout; one-ways; traffic management centre; disabled access to city; gullies
at bus stops; Crescent / Lower, Salthill crossing; Browne Roundabout crossings; location of traffic lights
near university; crossing at Flood Street; bus shelter at B&Q; Menlo Park roundabout planning; pedestrian
crossing at the back of Corrib Park; clearing of piers on Salmon Weir Bridge.
At 3.25pm, the Mayor left the Chair, and Deputy Mayor, Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair.
At 3.28pm, the Mayor resumed the Chair.
Mr. C.' Kileen, responded comprehensively to Members questions, and gave more detail of crossings
proposed at Wolfe Tone Bridge. He advised Members that the city would remain accessible for those with
disabilities, and would increase priority for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users. Mr. U. Finn also
responded to Members questions. Mr. U. Finn advised members that the images shared of the Salmon
Weir Bridge were illustrative, and the final design would have a number of considerations including the
protected structure, fisheries structures and environmental issues. A CPO was confirmed by An Bord
Pleanala without alterations for Kirwin Roundabout. Mr. U. Finn advised Members that a review of bus
shelters was due to take place. This survey would inform a submission to the National Transport Authority
seeking funding for shelters. Mr. U. Finn gave details of a traffic disruption the previous day, and
acknowledged the assistance of the Gardai in managing traffic flow. Mr. U. Finn committed to checking
the light sequence at Roscam. Mr. U. Finn advised Members that non-statutory workshops with Members
would take place again, with proposals for dates to follow.
Item 4 (g) National Ambulance Service Operations, including the
Helipad at UCHG
Mr. U. Finn introduced the report on the National Ambulance Service Operations, including the Helipad at
UCHG.
Mr. J. Hoare, Assistant National Director HSE Estates (West), gave a report on the proposed layout of the
site, which would ideally facilitate simultaneous landings and address safety concerns to be addressed as
part of aviation standards.
Prof. C. O'Donnell, Medical Director, National Ambulance Service, reported on the operations of the
helipad at UCHG by the Irish Coast Guard and the Air Force. Prof. C. O'Donnell advised Members that
almost 50% of helicopter medical movements in the country are at the helipad at UCHG.
The Mayor thanked Prof. C. O'Donnell and Mr. J. Hoare for their presentation and invited questions from
Members.
Questions and comments from Members included:
Part VIII enforcement ; acreage of land involved; public consultation; 4G astro turf pitch provision; zoning
responsibility of Members; ownership of property; importance of service provided; alternative locations
for the helipad;
Mr. B. McGrath advised Members that the design shown was indicative only, with no decision required.
He confirmed that consultation would take place. Mr. J. Hoare responded comprehensively to Members
71 Page
queries and advised Members that other locations were not suitable for the proposed development, due
to issues such as angles for approach, lighting, obstacle free approach, height of buildings etc. A full size
pitch would be incorporated in the development, as well as a bus corridor to facilitate the Transport plan.
HSE lands would be given over to facilitate the development of the pitch.
Mr. G. McMahon advised Members on a query on a legal instrument regarding the land. An FOI request
was received in this regard, and had been responded to when relevant documentation was received from
the Land Registry. The FOI refers to a CPO, and registration of land in 2012. The land was purchased, not
gifted, and had no covenants attending.
Mr. U. Finn also responded to Members queries in relation to the transport strategy and bringing public
transport into the hospital site. Mr. B. McGrath advised Members that further meetings would take place
with the HSE in the coming weeks, to formulate a proposal and a Section 183 notice regarding the use of
the lands. Consultation would take place as part of this process.
The Mayor requested that contact details for Mr. J. Hoare be circulated to members for further questions.
The Mayor confirmed that the meeting would finish at 6.00pm.
Regarding the May Ordinary Meeting and following discussion, it was agreed to commence the meeting
at 11.00am.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose we finish the May Ordinary meeting by 6.00pm.
Abstain: O
In favour: 15 Against: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 15
Item 4 (e) Galway European Capital of Culture 2020
The Mayor invited Ms. P. Philbin, CE of Galway2020 to give an update report, which included updates on
the Galway2020 Board; Small Towns Big Ideas; the volunteer programme; Tourism in the West of Ireland;
the Milwaukee 2020 showcase; and a recent visit by other Capital of Culture cities to Galway.
Questions and comments from Members included:
Funding; professional fees; VAT registration; number of employees; commercial sponsorship; signage in
the city and airline advertising; inclusion of Irish language; digital record of events; involvement of the
Taidhbhearc; areas for visual arts; Brexit; accommodation for visitors; bid book; engagement with schools;
travelling artists; municipal infrastructure space; programme announcement; legacy of Galway2020; Chair
of the board; financial statements and first year accounts; engagement with Western Development
Commission; opening ceremony; communications.
Ms. P. Philbin responded comprehensively to Members questions, and advised Members that the bid book
was a value proposition, which included 'in kind' costs. Sponsorship agreements are being developed but
would not be announced until signed. The existing programme is presented and costed against existing
funding — any additional funding would be used to add value to the programme. The Opening Ceremony
is in development for February 2020, in line with the Celtic calendar, with more details of the programme
to be announced in September. The programme would continue to develop beyond September 2019, and
would also have a legacy going into 2021. End of year accounts were audited and signed off by the Board
of Galway2020 at the last meeting.
81 Page
At 6.00pm, the Mayor requested an extension of 15 minutes to complete this item.
This was proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron, and agreed.
Ms. P. Philbin advised Members that a majority of events would be free. Mr. B. McGrath also responded
to Members' questions, and advised that Galway2020 will be a fantastic year for the city and the county.
The company has a clean audit report, and accounts not circulated by Galway City Council on behalf of
Galway2020 would be sent to Members. Mr. B. McGrath acknowledged the work of Ms. P. Philbin
providing leadership, to a first class arts team who will deliver a spectacular programme. Mr. B. McGrath
advised members that the economic spin-off from Galway2020 would be substantial, and would be a
legacy of the designation year. Mr. B. McGrath also advised Members that pieces of infrastructure outside
of the bid book will also start to appear.
The meeting ended at 6.15pm.
2.
b)
4.
a)
b)
h)
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Chief Executive's Report, Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023, Two-Year Progress Report,
in accordance with the Planning and Development Act (2000) as amended. Not considered.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Christmas Park and Ride - Report circulated February 2019. Not considered.
Review of the Christmas Market 2018 - Report circulated March 2019. Not considered.
Chief Executive's Reports:
Chief Executive's Report March 2019 - Circulated March 2019. Not considered. Taken as
i)
noted.
Chief Executive's Report April 2019 - Report issued April 2019. Not considered.
i) Quarterly Reports ending March 2019 — Reports issued April 2019. Not considered.
(ii)
(iii)
Environment.
Recreation & Amenity.
Community.
Culture & Economic Development.
Transportation.
5. NOTICES OF MOTIONS
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
NOM 2/17
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister
Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have access
to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional in the
sector. Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children
during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care and
education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to make
ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put children first
and invest in quality childcare.
Not considered.
91Page
NOM 4/17
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as
regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC
level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme.
With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost
importance that proper incentives are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and
that the legislation in place is as inclusive as possible".
Not considered.
NOM 9/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing so,
advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the European
Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing"
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009 and
2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region
approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches
broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in
order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order to
reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been
built by their efforts along with significant State investment from taxpayer moneV'.
Not considered.
10 |
Page
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 25th September, 2017.
' 'That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence
as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Slf Burca, Sli
Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisfn and Mhaoilfn
located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, GalwaV'.
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new criminal
offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators".
Not considered.
NOM 9/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct
hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge it
is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget
Not considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the
Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong
practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not considered.
NOM 19/18 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received:
19th November 2018
"That Galway City Council conduct a traffic count in Tirellan Heights and Ballinfoile Park to ascertain the
number of non-resident cars driving through the estates on a daily basis and bring forward plans /
options to eliminate and or restrict rat running through the estates"
Not considered.
NOM 01/19 Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 28th January 2019
"That Galway City Council consider providing funding in the 2020 budget to finance the provision of
dedicated park wardens in Galway City to ensure that our parks and in particular Terryland Forest Park,
Merlin Woods, Barna Woods, and Crestwood Park are monitored for anti social behaviour, illegal
dumping and tree felling."
Not considered.
11 |
Page
NOM 02/19 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Conchüir
Date Received: 30th January 2019
"That this Council reviews the issuing of parking permits in the Claddagh area. This review should
include the cost of the permit and the amount of permits issued to each residence. It should also
include the type of permit issued to carers and people who are visiting the sick."
Not considered.
Notice of Motion from the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 11th February 2019:
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Seconded: Cllrs. N. McNelis; O. Crowe; M. Lohan; D. Lyons;
P. Flannery; J. Walsh; N. Larkin; P. Keane; D. McDonnell & Cllr. P.
Conneely.
Following last weeks decision by An Bord Pleanala this Council calls on the HSE to immediately source
an alternative site on the grounds of Merlin Park for Galway Hospice.
Not considered.
NOM 04/19
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 21st February 2019
As proposer of the motion to rezone a seven acre site on lands at Merlin Park Hospital to allow for a
Hospice, as part of the Galway City Development Plan 2017-2023, I believe it's now of the upmost
importance that Galway City Council supports the Galway Hospice in seeking a judicial review of the
decision made by An Bord Pleanala to refuse planning permission for the move, and I propose that the
Council does everything in its power to support the Hospice's appeal.
Not considered.
NOM 09/19 Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 27th March 2019
Galway City Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it by section 199 of the Local Government
Act 2001 hereby makes the following bye-laws for the regulation and control of public roads and
footpaths adjacent to service providers of abortion services within the City of Galway to exclude any
form of prohibited behaviour within a 500 meter area from the outer edge of the healthcare facility
For the purposes of these bye-laws, 'prohibited behaviour' shall include but not limited to:
(i) continuously or repeatedly observing a service provider or other person accessing a healthcare
facility.
(ii) continuously or repeatedly observing a healthcare facility.
(iii) engaging in threatening conduct directed at the service provider or a person known to them.
(iv)besetting, harassing, intimidating, interfering with, threatening, hindering, obstructing or impeding a
person who is attempting to enter a healthcare facility.
(v) in any way recording a service provider, or a person accessing, or attempting to access a healthcare
facility without that person's consent, or publishing or distributing a recording so obtained, except in
discharge of police duty.
(Vi) recording information about a person accessing, or attempting to access a healthcare facility
without that person's consent, or publishing or distributing information so obtained, except in
discharge of police duty.
(Vii) distributing or displaying any leaflets, pamphlets, notices, advertisements or other documentation.
(viii) affixing bills, posters or stickers upon any wall, door, pole, structure, vehicle,
floor or pavement or on any surface forming part of, or used in relation to the healthcare facility.
(ix) conducting or taking part in public meetings, demonstrations or processions.
Not considered.
12 | Page
6. QUESTIONS
Q 4/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 1st November 2018
Can the Director confirm if a safety audit was carried out at the junction of the Old Seamus Quirke Rd at
the entrance to the Aldi Store in Westside. A motion was passed by this council in 2015 to this effect
but no update has been given since.
Not considered.
Q 5/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
1st November 2018
What safety measures are planned for installation on the Siobhan McKenna Road as discussed at our
area LIS meeting in Quarter one 2018?
Not considered.
Appendix 1
Questions submitted by Cllr. C. Connolly in relation to Item I(a) of the March Ordinary Meeting - Not
considered.
& Signed
Mayor of Galway
13 | Page
