1 
 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council 
held on Monday 16th May, 2016, 
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway. 
 
 
Presiding: 
 
Cllr. F. Fahy, Mayor of the City of Galway 
 
Present: 
Councillors:  B. Cameron, C. Ó Conchúir, P. Conneely, M.J. Crowe, 
O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane,  N. Larkin, 
D. Lyons, , A. Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis T. O'Flaherty and J. 
Walsh. 
 
In Attendance:           Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive 
 
 
 
Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Services 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services 
 
 
 
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services 
 
 
 
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services 
 
 
Mr. D. Mahon, Meetings Administrator, 
 
 
Ms. P. Philbin Senior Executive Officer, 
 
 
Mr. M. O’Donnell, Senior Executive Officer, 
                       
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer 
 
 
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer. 
 
 
 
Mayor Fahy welcomed the Councillors to the Special Meeting. 
 
At the commencement of the meeting Mayor Fahy proposed an adjournment of 15 minutes as a 
mark of respect on the recent passing of Freeman of Galway City Mr. Christy O’Connor Snr. 
The meeting was adjourned for 15 minutes.  
 
 
On the resumption of the meeting, the Mayor proposed condolences to the family of Mr. O’Connor. 
Mayor Fahy noted Mr. O’Connor’s achievements in the sporting world and stated that Mr. O'Connor 
had won over 20 important British and Irish tournaments and finished in the top 10 in the Open 
Championship on 10 occasions. Later he had considerable success in Seniors events, twice winning 
the World Senior Championship. In team events he played in 10 successive Ryder Cup competitions 
and played in 15 Canada Cup/World Cup matches for Ireland, winning the Canada Cup in 1958. 
Mayor Fahy stated that during his early career he was known simply as Christy O'Connor but went 
on to be known as "Himself" among his golfing peers. He died at the age of 91 on 14 May 2016. 
Mayor Fahy noted that Mr. O’Connor had been granted Freedom of the City of Galway in November 
1970.  The Elected Members also extended condolences on the passing of Mr. O’Connor and spoke 
about his significant sporting achievements and connections with Galway. 
 
The Mayor notified Councillors of his intention to attend the funeral in Dublin on the 17th May. Cllr. P. 
Conneely requested that other Councillors may attend along with representatives of the Divilly 
family, as the Freedom of the City was bestowed by former Mayor Divilly in 1970. This was agreed.  
 
Mayor Fahy notified Councillors of this intention to host a Mayoral Reception in June for the Mr. 

2 
John Moloney and the members of the Galway Race Committee. Notifications of the date to issue to 
Councillors in due course.  
 
1. Capital Assistance Scheme – Raising of a loan under Section 6 of the Housing 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1992 for the acquisition of housing units at: 
 
-  15, An Lochan, Headford Road, Galway 
 
- 124, Sean Bhaile, Doughiska, Galway 
 
- 46, Garran Ard, Doughiska, Galway 
 
Mr. T. Connell referred Councillors to the report issued.  
 
Capital Assistance Scheme – Raising of a loan under Section 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous  
Provisions) Act, 1992 for the acquisition / construction of housing units  
 
-  15, An Lochan, Headford Road, Galway 
- 124, Sean Bhaile, Doughiska, Galway 
- 46, Garran Ard, Doughiska, Galway 
 
Proposed:  
 
Cllr. D. McDonnell  
Seconded: 
 Cllr. T. O’Flaherty 
 
The Raising of a Loan was unanimously approved.  
 
Mayor Fahy proposed to take Item 3 next on the agenda and this was agreed.  
 
3. 
European Capital of Culture 2020  
 
Ms. P. Philbin SEO and Mr. M. O’Donnell SEO were welcomed to the meeting and delivered a 
presentation to the Councillors on the European Capital of Culture 2020 Bid. The presentation 
provided a broad overview of the current status of the bid including timelines up to the 
announcement of the successful bid in July 2016, the EU panel report on the first bid highlighting the 
positives in the bid and areas requiring attention, the concept and themes included in the bid, what 
the ECOC programme will look like, current work programme and next steps, economic benefits, 
business engagement and the 2020 club. Following the presentation, Councillors offered support to 
the bid and thanked the team for their work to date. All Councillors who spoke offered positive 
support for the bid and spoke about the significant social and economic gains the City could benefit 
from a successful bid. Councillors spoke about the legacy of a successful bid, the capacity in the city 
and county to deliver on the bid if successful, the importance of sport, language and heritage, the 
overall benefits to the city and region if the bid is successful, the goodwill and support from the 
wider community, including business community for the bid.  
 
Ms. Philbin and Mr. O’Donnell provided replies and clarifications on issued raised. The Chief 
Executive provided further information and clarification on the issues raised which were noted by 
Councillors.  He acknowledged the great work done to date by the bid team. The Chief Executive 
spoke about the significant economic benefits that would accrue to the city and region if the bid is 
successful and that the designation has to capacity to drive significant improvements in the quality 
of life for citizens. The competitive nature of the bid was stated and the support of all stakeholders 
noted. Mr. McGrath observed that the bid team will continue to engage with all stakeholders and 
that the support of the Councillors is very important. The capacity to deliver, scale of events, buy-in 
and legacy from a successful bid were outlined.   

3 
 
On the proposal of Mayor F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis, the Councillors unanimously 
resolved the following Motion. 
 
Having considered the report on the proposed bid by the City and County of Galway to become 
the European Capital of Culture for 2020, the Council: 
 
A) Unanimously supports the objectives, approach and proposed programmes as outlined in the 
report of the Chief Executive of Galway City Council; 
B) Formally endorses the financial strategy and proposed budget as outlined in the report of the 
bid; 
C) Agrees to the level of financial contribution from this Council as indicated in the report of the 
bid and, if successful in winning the title European Capital of Culture 2020, will include in its 
budgets in the period 2016-2021 levels of finance as outlined in the report of the bid. 
D) Requests regular reports on the progress of the bid. 
 
 
2 (a) 
Consideration of Legal advice in relation to the consequential filling of vacancies on 
Committees and other Bodies, arising from the Co-option of a Councillor.  
 
Mayor Fahy read the contents of the legal advice received to the Councillors and noted its summary 
and conclusions.  Cllr. C. Connolly welcomed the legal advice but stated that it failed to take into 
consideration other matters including gender balance as outlined in Schedule 10 of the Local 
Government Act 2001. Cllr. Connolly outlined her dissatisfaction with the process to date and referred 
to previous co-options of Councillors and consequential filling of vacancies on Committees.  
 
Cllr. P. Conneely stated that it was unfortunate that Cllr. Connolly did not agree with the democratic 
views of the elected members and stated his satisfaction with legal advice received.  Cllr. Conneely 
then referred to the previous meeting and stated that the Mayor had to adjourn the meeting ‘under 
pressure’. Mayor Fahy sought a withdrawal of that remark and Cllr. Conneely withdrew it.  Cllr. 
Conneely stated his dissatisfaction at the use of the phrase ‘misogynistic’ and claimed Cllr. Connolly 
directed the comment at himself and other elected members at the previous meeting. Cllr. Conneely 
then read the definition of misogynistic to the Chamber and requested that Cllr. Connolly withdraw 
the remark.  
 
Cllr. P. Keane expressed disappointment with the manner in which the matter was being dealt with 
and outlined reasons for same. Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir stated his disappointment with the matter and 
referenced a letter received by Cllr. Connolly on the 30th March indicating the committees she would 
become a member of upon her co-option. Cllr. A. Marley stated that it was unfair on Cllr. Connolly and 
gender balance on committees should be considered. Cllr. P. Flannery stated that his view that the 
legal advice was quite clear and that Cllr. Connolly had acknowledged that she had no automatic right 
to a place on the committees. Cllr. Flannery also requested Cllr. Connolly to withdraw the 
‘misogynistic’ claim attributed to Cllr. Connolly.  Cllr. T. O’Flaherty sought confirmation that it was 
Mayor Fahy who had sought that legal advice be obtained and this was confirmed by the Mayor.  Cllr. 
D. McDonnell queried how the letter was issued to Cllr. Connolly confirming positions on committees.  
Cllr. M. Farrell stated her belief that Cllr. Connolly was being treated unfairly and reiterated the 
importance of gender balance on committees and that the person co-opted should be then co-opted 
to the committees where the vacancies have arisen.  Cllr. M. Cubbard sated his dissatisfaction with 
the process and noted that since the General Election two additional females were entitled to become 
members of the JPC. 

4 
 
In reply, Mr. J. O’Neill Director of Services stated that in his view the legal advice received was clear. 
Ho noted that the letter issued to Cllr. Connolly on the 30th March was issued in error and apologised 
to Cllr. Connolly for being incorrectly advised. Mr. O’Neill stated that the Council must follow the law 
and the decision to nominate persons to the various committees was a matter for the elected 
members.  
 
Mayor F. Fahy stated that the Ordinary Meeting had been adjourned as inappropriate comments were 
levelled at him and he then sought that those remarks be withdrawn. Cllr. O. Crowe withdrew the 
remarks made at the May meeting and apologised for these comments. 
 
Cllr. C. Connolly stated it was not her mistake that she was notified by the Executive of the Council of 
the committees she would become a member of but noted the apology for same issued by Mr. O’Neill. 
Cllr. Connolly further queried the interpretation of the legal advice received and stated her 
dissatisfaction with the comments of other Councillors who questioned her suitability for membership 
of committees. She stated that she had an expectation that she would replace her predecessor on the 
committees and would have a level of influence on those committees and that this influenced her 
decision to accept the offer of co-option to the Council.  
 
The Chief Executive stated that the letter issued on the 30th March to Cllr. Connolly should not have 
issued and it was incorrect to advise Cllr. Connolly in the manner it did.  Mr. McGrath apologised to 
Cllr. Connolly  and the Council for the misinformation and confusion caused by the letter.  
 
    
2. (b) In the context of agenda item 2(a) to consider positions on the following: 
 
- Lough Corrib Navigation Trust 
- Galway City Joint Policing Committee 
- Regional Health Forum, Health Service Executive 
 
Galway City Joint Policing Committee 
The following nominations were received:  
Cllr. B. Cameron was proposed by Cllr. M. Cubbard and seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin 
Cllr. C. Connolly was proposed by Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir and seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell.  
On the proposal of Cllrs. Connolly, Marley, Ó Conchúir and Farrell a roll call vote was agreed. 
As the roll call vote was being taken a member of the public uttered a comment in the direction of 
Cllr. M. Cubbard and the Mayor requested the person to vacate the public gallery.  The meeting was 
adjourned at 6.50 pm and reconvened at 7.00 pm. 
 
The result of the roll call vote was as follows: 
 
Cllr. B. Cameron: 11 votes 
Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. 
Fahy, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. 
McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. T. O’Flaherty and Cllr. J. 
Walsh 
Cllr. C. Connolly: 7 votes 
Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. MJ Crowe, Cllr. O. 
Crowe, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. P. Keane and Cllr. A. Marley.  
 
Mayor Fahy declared the result and Cllr. Cameron was declared elected. 
 

5 
Regional Health Forum, Health Service Executive 
 
The following nominations were received:  
Cllr. N. McNelis was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. N.Larkin 
Cllr. C. Connolly was proposed by Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir and seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell.  
On the proposal of Cllrs. Connolly, Marley, Ó Conchúir and Farrell a roll call vote was agreed. 
 
The result of the roll call vote was as follows: 
 
Cllr. B. N.McNelis: 11 votes 
Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. 
Fahy, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. 
McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. T. O’Flaherty and Cllr. J. 
Walsh 
Cllr. C. Connolly: 4 votes 
Cllr. C. Ó Conchúir, Cllr. C. Connolly, C, Cllr. M. Farrell and 
Cllr. A. Marley.  
Absent: 
 
 
 
Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. MJ. Crowe and Cllr. O. Crowe 
 
Mayor Fahy declared the result and Cllr. McNelis was declared elected. 
 
 
Mayor Fahy agreed to consider Motions submitted from Councillors.  
 
Proposed: 
Cllr. P. Connelly 
Seconded: 
Cllr. P.  Flannery 
 
“Propose that legal costs in relation to consequential filling of vacancies on committees and other 
bodies arising from the co-option of a Councillor be paid by Cllr. Colette Connolly”. 
 
Cllr. P. Conneely and Cllr. P. Flannery spoke in favour of the Motion and outlined reasons why it 
should be supported. Following discussion it was agreed to defer consideration of the Motion until 
the next meeting and until the minutes of the Ordinary May Meeting are considered by the 
Councillors. A question as to who sought the legal advice arose for clarification.  Mayor Fahy stated 
that he as mayor requested  that legal advice be sought and that it was entirely reasonable for him 
to do so in the circumstances.   
 
The Chief Executive stated that the Council has an entitlement to request that legal advice be 
obtained and it was not appropriate to seek recoupment of costs from any Councillor in such 
circumstances.  The Chief Executive also refuted the extent of the likely cost of such advice.  Mayor 
Fahy restated that he had requested that legal advice be obtained and it would be a retrograde step 
to seek recoupment of costs from any Councillor.  Cllr. Conneely, as proposer of the Motion, agreed 
to defer further consideration until the next Meeting. 
 
Proposed: 
Cllr. P. Flannery 
Seconded: 
Cllr. J. Walsh 
 
“That this Council calls on Cllr Colette Connolly to withdraw her remarks and reference that 
certain members of the Council are misogynous in their approach to appointments on certain 
committees”. 
 
P. Flannery and Cllr. J. Walsh spoke in favour of the Motion and outlined reasons why it should be 
supported. Following discussion it was agreed to defer consideration of the Motion until the next 
Meeting. Both Councillors requested that Cllr. C. Connolly withdraw the remark. Cllr. P. Conneely 

6 
stated that he did not want to be associated with the term ‘misogynist’ and requested that the 
remark be withdrawn. Cllr. C. Connelly then requested the Meetings Administrator to record the 
previous comments from Cllr. P. Conneely. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Conneely, Conferences listed at the May Ordinary Meeting were agreed 
that Councillors would attend the following Conferences/Approved training: 
 
Housing Grants and Schemes 
Cllrs. Conneely and Cameron 
 
National Landscape Forum 2016 
Cllr. Conneely 
 
Economic Dimensions of Maritime Spatial Planning in Ireland 
Cllr. Conneely 
 
AILG Training Seminar – June 2016 
Cllrs. Conneely, O’Flaherty, and Cameron. 
 
Cllr. P. Conneely also requested an update on whether the Mayor had been invited to the Connacht 
Rugby Pro12 Semi Final and requested that match tickets be secured for Councillors.  
 
 
The Meeting ended at  7.35 pm.  
