Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
bsent:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council,
held on Monday June, 2014
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Cllrs. B. Cameron, C. Ö. Conchüir, , P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O,
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin,
Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis and T. O'Flaherty
Mr. B. McGrath, City Manager,
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance,
Mr. B. Dunne, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Cllr. J. Walsh
1.
(a)
CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 28th
April, 2014.
The minutes of the Ordinary Meeting held on 28th April were proposed by Cllr. Connolly and
seconded by Cllr. Keane.
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. Connolly raised the report to issue regarding Wolfe Tone Bridge. It was agreed that it was to
issue. Cllr. Cameron wished it noted that he had voted against the adoption of the Arts Grants.
Matters Arising:
Various matters were raised by members and responded to by officials. These included signage
regarding dog-fouling; aspects of the criteria for expressions of interest from community interests
regarding Knocknacarra Community Centre; testing at South Park and regulation of circuses.
(b) Minutes of Statutory Annual Meeting of Galway City Council held on Friday
6th June, 2014.
The minutes of the Annual Meeting held on 6th June were proposed by Cllr. McDonnell and
seconded by Cllr. Cameron.
1
There followed a lengthy discussion regarding the nominations both to outside bodies and to the
chairs of the Strategic Policy Committees. Various members raised a number of points including
the use of the group system of nomination and gender representation to the Education & Training
Board and other bodies. Some members felt that the outcome of the allocation of SPC
chairmanships was neither fair nor equitable.
Cllr Keane proposed, seconded by Cllr M.J. Crowe, "That the Chief Executive seek legal advice to
determine if Section 48 of the Local Government Act (2001) had been complied with in the
allocation of SPC chairs."
A roll-call vote was called.
7
In Favour:
Councillors Ö Conchür, Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, Farrell, Keane and Marley.
9
Against:
Councillors Cameron, Conneely, Cubbard, Fahy, Flannery, Larkin, Lyons, McDonnell and O'Flaherty.
The motion was defeated.
Following discussion, Cllr. O. Crowe's proposal to hold a special meeting on housing, seconded by
Cllr. Connolly, was agreed. (The date of the meeting to be determined later.)
2.
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
(i) Association of Irish Local Government
(amalgamation of the former following associations; Association of County & City
Councils (ACCC) and Association of Municipal Authorities of Ireland(AMAl)
The first position having been filled previously by the nomination of Cllr. Marley by group,
Cllr. Flannery proposed, seconded by Cllr. Fahy, the nomination of Cllr. Conneely to the
second position. Cllr. Cubbard proppsed, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, the nomination of Cllr.
O'Flaherty to the third position.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe sought clarification from the Chief Executive regarding adherence to
guidelines. The Chief Executive explained that the guidelines had issued from the AILG; that
he understood they were included in the draft constitution of the AILG to be ratified at its
first meeting but, unlike the ETB nominations, a Statutory Instrument determined by
Ministerial order did not govern them.
The Mayor deemed Cllr. Conneely and Cllr. O'Flaherty elected.
(ii) Galway Roscommon Education & Training Board
(Formerly City of Galway Vocational Educational Committee)
Appointment of the third of three Members to GRETB.
Cllr. Connolly requested a clarification from the Chief Executive regarding the requirement
for gender balance which he provided, referring to the Statutory Instrument in place from
the Minister of Education and Skills.
2
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Fahy, the nomination of Cllr. O'Flaherty. The
nomination was agreed.
(iii) To Consider Appointment of Procedures Committee of City Council
Members advised that non-party representation on the Procedures Committee had been
agreed as follows:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Cllr. Connolly
Cllr. O'Flaherty
Cllr. Cubbard
Cllr. Larkin
Cllr. McDonnell.
3.
4.
(b) Part VIII of the Planning and Development Regulations (as amended)
Part VIII Process pursuant to the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended)
Proposed demolition of fire damaged house and replace same with new dwelling at No.
59 and Refurbishment of dwelling at No. 60, Ballinfoile, Headford Road, Galway.
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, stepped through the report previously circulated. He
pointed out that he had met with area Councillors and he expected that, subject to
approval, work will begin in latter half of 2014.
In discussion which followed, Members raised a number of issues including the condition of
sewers in the area; the absence of a submission from Drainage section on the planning
report; the manner in which Members received the Director's report; the costs of the
proposed works; the causes of fires in the properties and the valuation and insurance of
City Council housing units.
The Director of Services provided clarification on issues and indicated that he would follow
up regarding drainage issues and was more than willing to meet with local residents. He
indicated that the works would go to tender within weeks.
Cllr. O. Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. Cubbard, adoption of the Part VIII process. This
was unanimously agreed.
Cllr. Connolly proposed, seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe, that a report on the sewerage and
drainage issues raised be prepared and circulated. This was unanimously agreed.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Local Government Reform Act 2014
(a)
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, stepped through the report, previously circulated,
regarding the Local Government Reform Act, 2014.
3
In discussion, Members raised issues in relation to the Service Delivery Plan, the Chief
Executive's monthly report; the role of the community and voluntary sector and local
democracy and the establishment of the Public Participation Network; commercial rates
and the re-valuation process; NPPR and the deadline in September regarding a decision on
raising or lowering LPT.
Mr. O'Neill clarified a number of issues and the Chief Executive referred to the complexity
and volume of guidance issuing regarding the implications of the new Act. He highlighted
the growing importance of the role of the local authority in economic and enterprise
development. The Head of Finance clarified the deadline for the decision on LPT and the
role of the Members in that decision.
(b) Water Services
Ms. E. McCormack, Director of Services, stepped through the report, previously circulated,
regarding water services. She referred to the Service Level Agreement (SLA) with Irish
Water and the Annual Delivery Plan.
In discussion following, Members raised issues in relation to Mutton Island and the
effectiveness of the Maximo reporting system. It was clarified that the Chief Executive had
been instructed to sign the SLA with Irish Water.
(c) Regional Cities Bike Share Scheme
Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Services, stepped through the report, previously circulated,
regarding Regional Cities Bike Share Scheme.
In discussion, several Members raised concerns regarding the omission of Salthill from the
scheme. Others issues raised included the timeline for the introduction of scheme vis a vis
the main tourist season; the use of Irish by the scheme operators and the likely timescale of
the roll-out of the second phase.
The following motions were taken together:
"That this Council fully supports Gaillimh le Gaeilgels suggestion that the proposed Cities
Bike Share Scheme be known as 'Rothar' and that the NTA liaise with Gaillimh le Gaeilge in
this regard"
Cllr. Connolly
Proposer:
Cllr Conchüir
Seconder:
"That the NTA seriously consider the recommendation made by Gaillimh le Gaeilge and our
Bilingual City Status to name the City Bike Scheme"
Cllr. Conneely
Proposer:
Cllr. Flannery
Seconder:
These were agreed unanimously and the Mayor declared the motions carried.
Arising from discussion, Cllr. O. Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, the following
motion:
in Kennedy Park, Eyre Square,
"That no further commercial ad-hoc activities takes place
4
(d)
5.
6.
7.
Galway as of today's date 16th June 2014".
This was agreed and the Mayor declared the motion carried.
Labour Activation Scheme
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, stepped through the report, previously circulated,
regarding 'Gateway', a labour activation scheme currently being rolled out across the local
authorities.
In discussion, while some Members welcomed the scheme, others expressed dissatisfaction
with the scheme and its treatment of people who are unemployed. Other issues raised
included the delays in Garda vetting; the role of the Department of Social Protection; the
potential for Gateway to impact on the grass-cutting programme of City Council and the
standard of grass-cutting in estates.
Having reached 7.30pm, Members agreed to extend to 7.45pm and finish.
Mr. O'Neill will revert to members with a report on the process of Garda vetting and the
role of the DSP. Mr. Connell will include in the next Quarterly report to Members
indications of the extent of grass-cutting in estates by Council staff. The Chief Executive
concurred with some of the comments regarding grass-cutting. He also referred to the
imminent Outdoor Workforce Planning exercise and the possibilities which may arise from
its conclusion.
(e) UNESCO City of Film
Deferred
European Capital of Culture 2020
Deferred
(g) Acquisition of lands from Galway Corrib Airport Ltd.
Deferred
NOTICE OF MOTIONS:
Deferred.
QUESTIONS
None.
CORRESPONDENCE:
For Councillors' information - circulated
5
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION
For Councillors information - circulated
CONFERENCES
Proposed by Cllr. Connolly, seconded by the Mayor and agreed.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy.
Votes of Congratulations
Seån Power — Best Director AIMS
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The following motion was proposed by Cllr. Flannery, seconded by Cllr. Conneely:
"l propose to bring forward the July meeting to Monday June 30th at 4.00pm"
Members voted as follows: In favour — 10; Against — 7. The Mayor declared the motion
carried.
Cllr. Fahy proposed, seconded by Cllr. McNelis, to hold two Special meetings on 23rd June
Housing between 4.00pm and 6.00pm and Considération of the Harbours' Bill between
6.00pm and 8.00pm.
Members voted as follows:
In Favour — 16;
Against — 1.
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
The Meeting then adjourned.
MAYOR
6
uLWAY