Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Friday 16th June, 2023
at 4.009m in the Aula Maxima, Quadrangle, University of Galway and online.
Presidinq:
Present:
Apologies
In Attendance:
Cllr. C. Higgins, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard, A. Curran, F. Fahy, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor &
T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. N. Larkin
Ms. P. Philbin, Chief Executive - Interim
Ms. H. Kilroy, Director of Services
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Ms. E. Fanning, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. J. Higgins, Heritage Officer
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Planner
Ms. L. Hynes, Finance/Management Accountant
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms. M. Walsh, Clerical Officer
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the meeting
in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
President Ciarån Ö hÖgartaigh, University of Galway welcomed all to the University and
spoke of his delight that the University was able to host this year's Annual General meeting
and looks forward to building relationships and working together with Galway City Council for
the years ahead.
Mayor C. Higgins welcomed all to the meeting and requested the suspension of Standing
Order 22 regarding the recording of meetings to allow for the taking of photographs and
videos.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
To suspend Standing Order 22.
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
This wasa reed anda roved b Council.
1. Election of Mayor
Mayor C. Higgins relayed her gratitude and pride at having served as Mayor of the city of
Galway for the last year. She paid tribute to her family, fellow Councillors, the Chief
1
Executive and the Senior Management Team, Deputy Mayor Cllr. Mike Cubbard, staff
from Corporate Services and the Mayoral office, Community and Culture department, all
Council staff, Ministers Hildegarde Naughton and Senator Seån Kyne and the people of
Galway for their support during the last year. Mayor C. Higgins spoke of her great pleasure
to attend over 558 events that were hosted across the city. She spoke of some of the
highlights of her mayoral term which included the Mayoral Ball, the opening of the new
Salmon Weir Pedestrian and Cycle Bridge, Mayoral receptions and the Mayor's Awards,
working with community groups and businesses to encourage tourism and investment.
Cllr. C. Higgins called for Nominations for the Position of Mayor of the City of Galway.
Cllr. E. Hoare was proposed as Mayor by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. C.
Higgins.
Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. C. Higgins spoke in favour of their proposal and outlined the
qualities, capabilities, and experience of Cllr. E. Hoare having been first elected to Galway
City Council in 2019.
No other nominations were received.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator declared Cllr. E. Hoare elected as Mayor of the City
of Galway.
Councillors extended compliments to outgoing Mayor C. Higgins and her family and
congratulated her on her achievements during her term. It was noted that she was the 9th
female Mayor of the city. The achievements and highlights were noted and acknowledged,
and members thanked the outgoing Mayor for her courtesy and fairness and her
commitment to the role of Mayor and her diligence representing the city.
The Interim Chief Executive expressed thanks and compliments to the outgoing Mayor on
behalf of all the staff in Galway City Council noting that Cllr. C. Higgins had represented
the City with dignity and pride during her term.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator invited Mayor Hoare to wear the Mayoral Chain
and photographs were taken.
On taking the chair, Mayor E. Hoare thanked his proposer Cllr. F. Fahy and seconder Cllr.
C. Higgins for their nomination. He thanked the outgoing Mayor Cllr. C. Higgins and
colleagues in the Council for their support. He thanked his wife Pam & his family for their
ongoing support. He stated that some of the key areas he will be focusing on in his Mayoral
term would be housing, transport, tourism, and sport, He also stated he would like Council
meetings to return to the council chamber and examine webcasting of meetings.
Councillors congratulated the Mayor on his election and wished him well as Mayor for the
year ahead. The Chief Executive also congratulated the Mayor and offered her continued
support and that of the staff of the City Council.
2
2. Election of Deputy Mayor
The Mayor invited nominations for the position of Deputy Mayor of Galway City.
Cllr. D. Lyons was proposed as Deputy Mayor by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and seconded
by Cllr. F. Fahy.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. F. Fahy spoke in favour of their proposal.
No other nomination was received.
Mayor E. Hoare declared Cllr. D. Lyons elected as Deputy Mayor.
Ms. A. Rohan invited Deputy Mayor Lyons to wear the Deputy Mayoral Chain and
photographs were taken.
Cllr. D. Lyons thanked his proposer Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and seconder Cllr. F. Fahy for their
nomination. He gave special thanks to his wife and family and his council colleagues for
their continued support.
Councillors congratulated the Deputy Mayor on his election. The Chief Executive also
congratulated the Deputy Mayor on his election.
3. Appointment of Representative on Other Body
Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances td (IPB) Appointment of One (1) Member (for
a period of one year). (Non-Group Appointment by Vote.)
Mayor E. Hoare was proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell
No other nominations were received, and Mayor E. Hoare was appointed for another
term.
4. To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
The practice has been that Ordinary Meetings are held on the second Monday of each
month, except for the month of August. It was noted that the March meeting is proposed
to be held a week early due to St. Patrick's Day celebrations.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that meetings take place at 3.00pm as outlined below. The motion
was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy and agreed and approved by Council.
10th July 2023
1 lth September 2023
9th October 2023
13th November 2023
1 1 th December 2023
8th January 2024
12th February 2024
3
4th March 2024
8th April 2024
13th May 2024
10th June 2024
It was agreed by Council to remove the proposed date of 10th June 2024 due to the
date of Local Elections being set for Friday 7th June, 2024. This was agreed by Council.
The Meetings Administrator invited Members to assemble outside for photographs of the
Council, as a robed body.
The Meeting concluded at 17:40.
Minutes, nfirmed & Signd
' ilL-
Mayor of Galway
4