nu so e r nary ee ng
a way
ounc
held in the Ardilaun Hotel and virtually on zoom platform
on Monday of April 2023 at 3.00 p
o noily,
yrne,
unc ors:
eevers,
u an,
M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
resen
resen
Present
ons
ouncr ors:
ne
a In
onnor
P. Philbin, Director of Services
M
s. H. Kilro Head of Finance/Director of Services
F. McEvo , Senior Executive En ineer
Mr.
G. McMahon, Senior Executive Officer
Ms.
L. Fannin , Senior Engineer
E. McNamara, Executive Architect
o
Ms
Mr.
Mr
Ms.
. L. Esler, Administrative Officer
n - n ta 'cer
A. Ni Chülåin, Clerical Officer
Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
ent
M. Lall , Senior Trans ort Pro•ect Mana er
L. H nes, Finance/Mana ement Accountant
R. O'Reill . Senior Executive En ineer
D
Ms. Muiriosa Guinan, Arts Develo ment Officer
It ff
Ms. J. Hi gins, Administrative Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
e,co
d & Signed
May of Galw
1
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator, commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed
by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor. C. Higgins welcomed Councillor A. Curran to the meeting who was co-opted
at the March Ordinary Council meeting.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons that the meeting concludes at 6.30pm and that a
break be taken at 4.45pm for fifteen minutes. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard
and agreed.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty referred to a Motion she submitted under Standing Order no. 34 for
the purpose of dealing with urgent business and requested same be considered at the
meeting.
Cllr. N. McNelis requested that the item 4(b) Arts Grants 2023 Report be considered.
Mayor. C. Higgins advised that both matters will be considered.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
1 (a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 6th March, 2023
Mayor C. Higgins invited Matters of Accuracy and Matters Arising.
Under matters arising, Councillors raised some queries regarding Kingston and South Park
Master Plans. Cllr. N. McNelis proposed that an update be provided at an upcoming Special
meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services and Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries
raised.
c e is
econ
yons
I(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on 6th March, 2023
ree dado ted
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2(a) Vacancy on the Galway & Roscommon Education & Training Board (GRETB)
following the resignation of Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Cllr. M. J. Crowe nominated Cllr. J. Connolly be appointed to the vacant position on the
Galway (GRETB).
2
ropose y: r,
row
econ
eeve
2(a) Nomination of Cllr. John Connolly to be appointed to the board of Galway
& Roscommon Education & Training Board (GRETB) following the resignation
of Cllr. Michael Crowe
Co n il
2(b) To Agree a Date/Location for the Annual Council Meeting - Proposed date Friday
16th June at 4pm
ropose _ y:
yons
2(b) Proposed date Friday 16th June at 4pm for the Annual Council meeting.
his w s reedb ouncil
2(c) Raising of a Loan in relation to Local Authority Home Loan Scheme
Councillors discussed the agenda item and raised a few queries.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services & Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services, respond to queries
raised.
Yons
2(c) Raising of a Loan in relation to Local Authority Home Loan Scheme to
the value of
i wa
re dan
un il
2(d) Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, as amended - Seamus
Quirke Road Day Centre and Temporary Emergency Homeless Accommodation
Mr. E. Humphries, Senior Executive Architect, gave a detailed overview to Councillors about
the Seamus Quirke Road Day Centre and Temporary Emergency Homeless Accommodation.
Councillors discussed the proposal, and Mr. E. Humphries and Mr. B. Barrett responded to
same.
ropos . y;
econ
2(d) Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, as amended -
Seamus Quirke Road Day Centre and Temporary Emergency Homeless
Accommodation
3
2(e) Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 Notice - Proposal for Disposal of
Council Lands: Disposal of Merlin Park Waste Water Pump Station Site to Uisce Éireann
Councillors discussed the proposed disposal of lands and some queries were raised.
The Chief Executive responded to queries raised.
ropose y: r,
yons
c on e
A2(e) Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 Notice - Proposal for
Disposal of Council Lands: Disposal of Merlin Park Waste Water Pump
Station Site to Uisce Éireann — per Report circulated 31st March, 2023
2(f) Galway City Council Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) Bye-Laws No. 1 - 2023
Mayor C. Higgins referred to the Report that issued and it was agreed by Council that it would
be taken as read.
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer gave an overview of the proposed Bye-Laws to
Councillors and advised an implementation date of 28th August, 2023 should the Council
approve same to allow for communication with stakeholders including the Garda Siochåna.
Councillors discussed same and queries were raised including more visible signage,
clarification regarding speed zones from Galway Crystal on the Old Dublin Road to Doughiska
as no visible signage, provision of infrastructure and safe crossings on the N59, request for
adequate signage on the Coast Road and the removal of redundant signage poles.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed markings on the road when entering a 30km speed zone. This was
seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. It was agreed that this would be examined and considered at
an upcoming Strategic Policy Committee meeting.
Mr. F. McEvoy and Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer, responded to queries and clarifications.
pose
econ
ces
2(f) To adopt the Galway City Council Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits)
Bye-Laws No. 1 - 2023
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: 0 Present: 16
i
Mr. F. McEvoy advised that Citywide Review Speed Limits Report along with other matters
raised will be considered at an upcoming Strategic Policy Committee scheduled for 9th May,
2023.
4
2(g) Audit Committee Annual Report 2022
Councillors discussed the agenda item and raised queries.
Ms. H. Kilroy, Head of Finance, responded to queries.
ropose y: r,
c onne
econ
yons
2(g) Audit Committee Annual Report 2022
Th Re ort was noted b rounci
2(h) Audit Committee S121 Report
Councillors discussed the agenda item and raised queries.
Ms. H. Kilroy, Head of Finance and the Chief Executive responded to queries raised.
2(h) Audit Committee S121 Report
2(i) Audit Committee Work Programme 2023
Councillors discussed the agenda item and raised queries.
Ms. H. Kilroy, Head of Finance and the Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications
raised.
c nne
2(i) Audit Committee Work Programme 2023
Yons
2(j) Draft Annual Financial Statement 2022 (subject to Audit)
(i) Approval of Annual Financial Statements (Unaudited) for year ended 31st
December 2022
Councillors discussed this agenda item in detail and raised some queries.
Ms. H. Kilroy, Head of Finance and the Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications
raised
5
po
ces
c onne
2(j)(i) Approval of Annual Financial Statements (Unaudited) for year ended
31st December 2022
ii.
Approval of Transfers To/From Reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the
Accounts
yons
2(j)(ii) Approval of Transfers To/From Reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the
Accounts
iii.
Approval of Over/Under Expenditure by Division as detailed in Note 16 of the
Accounts
tis
2(j)(iii) Approval of Over/Under Expenditure by Division as detailed in Note 16
of the Accounts
Oted n
rove
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Note of Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 29th March, 2023
Ms. A. Rohan gave a brief overview of matter raised at the recent meeting.
She referred Councillor to the Training and Development Programme for 2023 and invited
input and any requests from Councillors for training.
She advised that the seal of the Council will be updated from Bardas na Gaillimhe 1973 to
Comhairle Cathrach na Gaillimhe 2001. A Report on the matter issued to the Corporate
Policy Group and this was noted by Council.
ropose y:
yons
econ
c e Is
3(a) Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 29th March, 2023
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) Report on proposed new cemetery at Dublin Road
Mayor Higgins requested the deferred of this item.
6
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that this item be deferred until the next Ordinary Meeting in May and
taken as the first item on the agenda. This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and agreed.
4(b) Arts Grants 2023 Report
Mr. G. McMahon, NSenior Executive Officer gave an overview of the Report circulated to
Councillors and responded to queries raised.
_ropos__ Yi
ces
4(b) Arts Grants 2023 Report — per Report circulated
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: 0 Present: 17
Igg ns
Councillors discussed the level of funding currently provided for Arts Grants in Galway city
gg ns
Request to the Executive to consider raising the draft budget amount taking
into account the views of Councillors.
In Favour: 15 Against: 0 Abstain: 2 Present: 17
ropose. ...„_
rowe
econ
To raise the budget for Arts Grants to €850,000 for 2024
_ln Favour: 8 Against: 7 Abstain: 2 Present: 17
4(c) Coirib go Césta Galway City Flood Relief Scheme Update — Not considered.
4(d) Chief Executive's Report: - Not considered.
a. March 2023 - issued
b. April 2023 -to follow
4(e) Quarterly Reports - January to March, 2023 - to follow — Not considered.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Economic, Community & Cultural Development
Environment & Climate Change
Housing
Recreation & Amenity
Transport & Infrastructure
7
4(f) Local Government Boundary Arrangements for Galway City Council - Not considered.
4(g) Challenges affecting Housing Delivery — to follow - Not considered.
4(h) Draft Galway City Council Protocol on Civic Commemorations - issued November 2022
- Not considered.
4(i) Crown Square Update - circulated January, 2023 - Not considered.
4(j) EPA Focus On Local Authority Environmental Enforcement - Performance Report 2021 -
issued 7th December, 2022 - Not considered.
4(k) National Oversight and Audit commission (NOAC) Galway City Council Scrutiny Report
- copy issued 6th January, 2023 - for noting - Not considered.
4(1) Proposed Galway City Council Cycling Enhancement Project at Ballyloughane Road -
Not considered.
Councillors discussed Motions submitted under Standing Order no. 34 for the purposes of
dealing with urgent business. Some queries were raised.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer advised that the Ballyloughane Cycling Enhancement Project is
on the Council agenda and suggested that this Motion be considered when this agenda item
is considered in full by Council.
Council proceeded to consider the Motion.
ropos
Motion submitted under Standing Order no. 34 for the purposes of dealing
with urgent business.
We propose that Galway City Council reject the proposals set out in the
Ballyloughane Road IRenmore Avenue Active Travel Scheme.
In Favour: 14 Against: 2 Abstain: 1 Present: 17
ropo V: r
oare
econ
u ar
Motion submitted under Standing Order no. 34 for the purposes of dealing
Mith urgent business.
"'Following the recent launch of the Community Centres Investment Fund -
New Build Measure by The Department of Rural and Community
Development I propose that Galway City Council in collaboration with
Newcastle Combined Community Association N.C.C.A. CLG makes an
application under this fund to seek funding for the development and
construction of a new Community Centre at Moyola Lane, Newcastle,
Galway."
he Motio wasa roved b ounci
8
r os
r,«
That a Special Meeting take place on Monday the 24th of April at 3pm to discuss
the housing crisis and local government boundary arrangements for Galway
city.
5. NOTICES OF MOTION - Not considered.
ubmittedb . IlrwA.Cheevers. n
I am calling on Galway County Council to have full consultation with Galway City
Council public representatives in relation to the Master Plan for the Galway Airport
Site.
I believe that as it's is jointly owned with the county council the city council need to
have full consultation in this rocess and it should not be solel for Count Council.
0 8 02 Su mi
un er
a ounct mee Ing e on
pn
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
th
th
That Galway City Council to permanently pedestrianise cross street and that would
be from the Dåil Bar to Supermacs and to work with businesses to ensure the safety
for pedestrians and cyclists.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda. The Motion was
deferred at a Special meeting held on 30th May 2022 and a Report is to be brought
to Council on the matter.
Submitted by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty on the 7th June, 2022
th
We propose that Galway City Council reject the proposals set out in the
Ballyloughane Road /Renmore Avenue Active Travel Scheme in its present
format; that the Council Executive have further discussions with the two national
schools, Gaelscoil Dara and Scoil Chaitriona, together with representatives of
local residents, sporting organisations and other stakeholders to bring forward an
Active Travel Scheme which accommodates the needs of and ensures the
a reement of all interested arties.
cNeIi on the- h June 20
ubmitte C r
That Galway City Council will call on the Ministers for Justice; Education; and
Children, Disability, Equality & Integration to immediately implement an Operation
Encompass-style programme between An Garda Siochåna and schools.
Operation Encompass is a police-led, school-based early intervention
safe uardin scheme which su orts children and oun eo le who ex erience
9
Domestic Abuse. Operation Encompass was created to ensure that by the start of
the next school day, a child's school will be informed that there has been a police-
attended incident of domestic abuse at the home of the child. The child is then
supported immediately upon arrival at school.
In 2020, Women's Aid (Ireland) reported that there were 30,841 disclosures of
abuse including 5,948 were against children. We need to support these children
now. www.o erationencom ass.or
NOM 14/2022
s
th
That Galway City Council will write to the Advertising Standards Authority for
Ireland to complain that the short-term letting platform Airbnb is carrying
advertisements for properties within the Galway Rent Pressure Zone which are in
breach of lannin re ulations.
0 6/20
st
We propose that item 4(a) Consideration of reports of Officials for the proposed
Galway City Council Active Travel project for the Ballyloughane Road and
Renmore Avenue that this item will not be discussed until full consultation has
taken place with all of all the stakeholders that will be greatly affected by this
scheme if it goes ahead.
Signed by: Cllrs. Terry O' Flaherty, Alan Cheevers, Noel Larkin, Michael Crowe,
Declan Mc Donnell.
L onso c 20
Submitted b 11
I request Galway City Council to progress the installation of a lighted pedestrian
crossing on the Barna Road at the laneway that exits from the Rusheen Woods to
the Barna Road. This laneway since upgraded is widely used by residents who
walk the back Promenade. It is my understanding that the necessary drawings
have been completed for some time for a pedestrian crossing at this location.
Reply Issued: 5th April 2023
Cllr D.L ns Re uested NOM 17/2022 to be resubmitted 10th A ril 2023
9 202
th
I request Galway City Council to immediately begin the process of the Taking-ln-
Charge of the laneway linking Ballymoneen Road to the Rosard estate which is
adjacent to the grounds of St. John the Apostle Church and the Monalee Heights
estate.
th
That this council is concerned in relation to the operation of the transport division
of the Cit Council and calls on the CEO to ca out anu ent review of its
10
operations and to report back to the next Council meeting with proposals to
improve the delivery of transport projects of all types in the City and to improve
consultation with the elected members and ublic alike.
N
12 3
th
That Galway City Council review and urgently address the flooding issues that
continue to persist at the playing pitches in South Park. This is a serious health
and safety issue and is impacting on the uses of the playing pitches during periods
of hea rainfall.
NO 02 202
th
That Galway City Council commit to constructing a pedestrian crossing at Dangan
and another at Bushypark along the N59. This is a very dangerous location and
edestrian crossin s would make it safer for all road users.
0M 02
th
n
Galway City Council calls on the NTA to ensure that bus shelters installed in
Galway include end panels at both ends of the shelter to provide maximum
rotection from the elements.
ubmi -b
th
02
anu
Galway City Council requests the NTA to attend a meeting of Galway City Council
to discuss the provision of bus licences within Galway City prior to conducting the
review of the Galwa Trans rtation Strate
Submitte b lir
urran n
That Galway City Council would as a matter of public safety, with immediate effect,
reallocate space from the hard shoulder and carriageway width on the R338
Oranmore Coast Road, from the junction of the old Dublin Road to the end of the
city border on the R338, in order to provide safe walking and cycling space. That
the Council would achieve this by carrying out the following actions:
clearing the existing hard shoulders of weeds, shrubs, overhanging
branches, and other vegetation, mud and any matter organic and inorganic,
in order to maximise the space available,
removing all construction debris, rubbish, and other impediments to safe
use,
filling in all potholes and resurfacing the hard shoulders so that they are
smooth and level, and safe for pedestrians, wheelchair users, buggies and
bicycles,
creating segregation between the road carriageway and the walking/cycling
space by the use of bollards and planters.
11
This action is to be recognised as the first of several steps in the creation of proper
Active Travel routes i.e. footpaths and bike lanes, for those living, working, or
attendin school in the area.
s
th
This Council calls for the following actions conceming residential land, vacant land
registers, and vacancy officers:
a) The development of comprehensive masterplans for all zoned residential land
that has not been built on or have valid planning applications, ensuring efficient
and sustainable use of land for housing development, infrastructure, public
transport, and community facilities.
b) A thorough review and justification for why each parcel of residential zoned land
that has not been built on is not on the vacant land register, with the aim to rectify
discrepancies or omissions and provide transparent information on the register.
c) To ask the Minister in the Department for Housing, Local Government and
Heritage, Darragh O'Brien, for additional funding for the immediate hiring of
additional vacancy officers to improve the identification of vacant properties and
land, and to enforce levies effectively, thereby promoting the development of
vacant and underutilised properties and contributing to the city's housing supply.
By implementing these measures, Galway City Council aims to promote
responsible and sustainable development of residential land and encourage the
use of vacant and underutilised properties in contributing to the city's
rowth and vitali
6. QUESTIONS - Not considered.
9th une O
ubmittedb Cll M ubbar on
Can the council provide a list of all masterplans/projects that have been approved
by council for the Recreation & Amenity department and give the following
information on each:
•
Adoption Date,
Estimated budget,
Funding available as of 19/06/22,
Timeline for com letion
12
2
What is the reason for the delay in constructing the changing shelter proposed for
Ballyloughane Beach?
A sum of €40,000 was included for this project in the 2021 Galway City Council
budget, but while other projects agreed at the same time have gone ahead, there
is not even a reference made to the Ballyloughane changing facility and the long
overdue new toilets in the Annual Service Delivery Plan for 2023.
2/20
b
noll
th
"What was the total expenditure incurred by the parks and environment sections
respectively in the provision of overtime services in 2022?"
Submitte b
st
My question relates to the new "cost rental backstop" whereby the council or an
Approved Housing Body (AHB) will purchase the home of renters who are not in
receipt of HAP or RAS but who are facing homelessness due to the sale of the
property. I realise that initially the AHBs will not be involved, and the council will
be empowered to purchase the property. What extra resources (e.g. manpower
and budgetary) is the council devoting to ensure this and how long will it be until
the council have the infrastructure in lace to start makin urchases?
Q4/202
th
Can Galway City Council urgently look at the design of Upr and Lwr Clybaun Road
and Upr and Lwr Ballymoneen roads as pedestrian crossings at this roundabouts
are not safe and the speed coming off these is very high.
Elected members of the West Ward met with Garda Superintendent last week and
also raised this but there needs to be a desi n chan e to make these areas safe.
7. CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy,
(a) Correspondence received 24th January 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Tipperary County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(b) Correspondence received 31 of January 2023 from Minister Obrien regarding
URDF
(c) Correspondence from Westem Inter-County Railway Committee received 28th
June 2022
(d) Correspondence received 1 5th February 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Wicklow County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(e) Correspondence received 21st February 2023 regarding National Women's
Council.
(f) Correspondence received 22nd February 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Sligo County Council Ordinary Meeting.
13
(g) Correspondence received 22nd February 2023 regarding Four Resolutions
passed at Sligo County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(h) Correspondence received 23rd February 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Kerry County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(i) Correspondence received 27th February 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Cavan County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(j) Correspondence received 6th March 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Westmeath County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(k) Correspondence received 13th March 2023 regarding Participation in the
Fourth Open Government National Action Plan 2023-2025
(l) Correspondence received 15th March 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Clare County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(m)Correspondence received 15th March 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Tipperary County Council Ordinary Meeting
(n) Correspondence received 15th March 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Tipperary County Council Ordinary Meeting
(o) Correspondence received 16th March 2023 regarding Resolution passed at
Sligo County Council Ordinary Meeting
(p) Correspondence received 20th March regarding Proposed Corrib Beo
Symposium
(q) Correspondence received 20th March regarding N=Monitoring Reports — The
Galway Traveller Movement
(r) Correspondence received 24th March 2023 regarding letter from Minister
Darragh O'Brien
(s) Correspondence received 27th March 2023 regarding Motion from Wexford
County Council
(t) Correspondence received 29th March 2023 regarding IBAL Anti-Litter League
2023
(u) Correspondence received 31st March 2023 regarding letter from TD Paschal
Donohoe
(v) Correspondence received 3rd April 2023 regarding REF No. 586 - Galway Co
Co N6 Galway Ring Road Motorway Scheme 2018
(w) Correspondence received 3rd April 2023 regarding REF 0 698 - Galway Co
Co N6 Galway Ring Road Motorway Scheme 2018
(x) Correspondence received 4th April 2023 regarding Resolution passed at Pffaly
County Council Ordinary Meeting.
(y) Correspondence received 5th April 2023 from An Bord Pleanåla regarding
Cross City Link
8. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None
14
9. CONFERENCES
Approved Training
I) Title: AILG Module 2 Training
Dates: 25th March 9:30am — 1 :OOpm
Venue: The Fairways Hotel, Dundalk, Co. Louth
2) Title: AILG 2023 Annual Training Conference
Dates: 19th - 20th April
Venue: Hotel Kilkenny, Co. Kilkenny
Conferences were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy/CongratuIations were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by
Cllr. F. Fahy.
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
Mayor C. Higgins expressed her congratulations to Mayo County Council, Mayo
Roscommon Hospice, the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Taoiseach in relation
to the recent visit of President Joe Biden.
She congratulated R. Lehmann, Tourism Officer, B. Barrett, A/Director of Services and
the team on the very successful St. Patrick's Day Parade in the city.
She also informed the Councillors that the Mayoral Ball will be taking place on Friday
12th of May 2023 and invited all Councillors to attend.
Cllr. D. Lyons referred to an upcoming Mayoral Reception that will be taking place on
Friday the 21st of April for Mr. Richard Hayes.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator advised that the May Ordinary meeting will be
held in Atlantic Technological University, Dublin Road on Monday 8th May, 2023.
The meeting concluded at 6.30pm.
15
