Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
Held on Monday 17th July 2017 at 4:00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M.
Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
Mayor Flannery opened the Meeting and welcomed all.
Cllr. P. Conneely proposed that "Galway City Council adopt the Standing Orders as amended
pursuant to the Document as circulated - without debate". The Motion was seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe advised that he wished to submit an amendment to the Motion. He stated that a
number of Councillors could not attend the Special Meeting held on 07th June 2017 and queried the
legality of same under Standing Orders.
Mayor Flannery confirmed that protocol under Standing Orders was followed with regard to the
Special Meeting held on 07th June 2017 and the required notice was issued to all Councillors. The
meeting was validly convened and legal in all respects.
A number of Councillors expressed their views on the matter.
At 4.08 p.m., Mayor Flannery adjourned the Meeting for five minutes and the Meeting resumed at
4.13 p.m.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe proposed that "this Council adopt the amendments to Standing Orders as
tabled, with the exception of the amendment which proposes to end the saying of the prayer at
the commencement of Council meetings under Standing Order no. 2 which amendment shall be
struck down". The Motion was seconded by Cllr. P. Keane.
A discussion was held regarding Standing Orders including SPCs, casual vacancies, and a number of
Councillors spoke on the matter of Standing Order no. 2 - Prayer / Reflection at Commencement.
The Chief Executive Mr. McGrath confirmed that once adopted the Standing Orders would come into
force with immediate effect.
Cllr. O. Crowe referred to the timeline in advance of the Special Meeting of the 07th June 2017 and
correspondence that issued to Councillors.
On the proposal of Mayor Flannery, the Meeting was adjourned at 4.40 p.m. to allow the Chief
Executive to retrieve correspondence and provide clarity on the matter.
The Meeting resumed at 4.50 p.m.
The Chief Executive responded and referred to three Meeting dates:
An Ordinary Council Meeting that was held on Monday 8th May and two subsequent Special Council
Meetings held on Monday 15th May and Wednesday 7th June 2017.
Mr. McGrath confirmed that he had sent e-mail correspondence to all Councillors on Friday 5th May
2017 and proceeded to read same. This correspondence referred to upcoming meetings and it noted
that the then Mayor, Cllr. N. Larkin, and Chief Executive would be absent for the Meeting of 8th May
due to official business out of the country. It respectfully suggested business that could be
conducted at the meeting scheduled for Monday 8th May, in their absence, and, this would be
determined at the discretion of the Deputy Mayor and Councillors that would be present at this
Meeting.
Mr. McGrath confirmed that the Special Meeting held on Wednesday 7th June 2017 was held in
accordance with Standing Orders. He advised that
Councillors signed the requisition for the
Special Meeting held on Wednesday 7th June 2017, and that the ratification of Standing Orders stood
to be considered at this Meeting on Monday 17th July 2017.
Mayor Flannery proceeded to read out the Motion and amendment as submitted. The amendment
proposed by Cllr. M.J. Crow was considered first.
"That this Council adopt the amendments to Standing Orders as tabled, with the exception of
the amendment which proposes to end the saying of the prayer at the commencement of
Council meetings under Standing Order no. 2 which amendment shall be struck down".
Proposed: Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
In Favour:
3 Against:
Abstain:
14
1
Present:
18
This amendment was defeated.
Mayor Flannery then tabled the Motion submitted by Cllr. P. Conneely:
"That Galway City Council adopt the Standing Orders as amended pursuant to the Document as
circulated — without debate".
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
In Favour:
14 Against:
4
Abstain:
o
Present:
18
This motion was passed.
The Mayor declared the Standing Orders, as amended and as circulated with the agenda for the
meeting to be adopted. The new Standing Orders will come into effect at the next meeting of Galway
City Council (presently scheduled for Monday 11th September 2017.
The meeting concluded at 5.15 p.m.
& Signed
Map