1 
   
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council,  
held on Monday 17th September, 2014 
 at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway. 
 
 
Presiding: 
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway. 
 
Present: 
Cllrs. B. Cameron, C. Ó. Conchúir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. 
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, A. 
Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh 
 
In Attendance:           Mr. B. McGrath, City Manager, 
 
 
 
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, 
   
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance, 
 
 
Mr. B. Dunne, A/Director of Services, 
 
 
Ms. N. Moggan, Financial Management Accountant, 
 
 
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator, 
 
 
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner, 
 
 
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner, 
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer. 
 
 
 
1. 
Consideration of setting a local adjustment factor for the Local Property Tax 
 
Ms E. McCormack, Head of Finance, referred to the report, previously circulated, regarding the 
setting of the local adjustment factor for the Local Property Tax. She indicated that there had been 
two submissions in the course of the public consultation period; one from Galway 
Chamber/Galway City Business Association and another from a private individual. She referred to 
the increased local discretion that the LPT afforded the Council and the elected members in setting 
the Annual Budget. 
 
In discussion that followed, each of the elected members spoke to the issue. Some members 
expressed opposition to the tax itself while others referred to the different outcomes of either 
maintaining the current level of property tax or lowering it by up to 15%. 
 
The Chief Executive reminded members that this would be a decision to be taken annually as a 
reserved function and acknowledged that it was a difficult one from members to make. 
 
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr Conneely, the following motion: 
 
“We propose that Galway City Council vary the basic rate of Local Property Tax within its functional 
area from 2016 proposed Programme of Work included in the outline Budget for 2015”. 
 
Cllr. Farrell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Marley, the following: 
“That this Council notes:  
 That the Local Property Tax is little more than another austerity tax which will push many 
struggling families over the edge. 
 That each local authority has the power to vary the Property Tax by 15% 

2 
 Calls on Galway City Council to use its powers under current legislation to reduce the Local 
Property Tax by 15%” 
 
The Mayor deemed this to be an amendment to the substantive motion and called for a vote: 
 
In Favour 
7 
 
Against 
10 
 
Abstaining 
1 
 
The amendment was defeated. 
 
The Mayor called for a vote on the original, substantive, motion: 
 
In Favour 
11 
Against 
7 
Abstaining 
0 
 
The motion was carried. 
 
2.  
Consideration of varying the City Development Plan 
 
Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Service, stepped through his report, previously circulated, 
regarding the possible variation to the City Development Plan. He outlined the need for this in light 
of the revised transportation study, the Section 85 agreement with Galway County Council and 
possible solutions to traffic problems around the city. 
 
In discussion that followed, elected members sought clarification on the issue including whether a 
vote was required at this point. It was pointed out that the process for now was to remove specific 
references to the ‘Outer By-Pass’ and to refer to a range of options.  Mr. Dunne informed members 
that the suggested variation would be circulated to statutory and other prescribed bodies for 
comment prior to reverting to City Council for further consideration and subsequent public 
consideration. 
 
This was noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Meeting then concluded 
