Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Friday 18th June, 2021
at 4.00pm in Leisureland, Salthill, Galway and online.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Mr. B.
Ms. R.
Mr. D.
Mr. p.
Mr. D.
Mr. G.
Ms. A.
Ms. G.
Mr. S.
McGrath, Chief Executive
McNally, Director of Services
Smyth, Director of Services
Greene, Director of Services
Mahon, A/Director Of Services
McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Rohan, Administrative Officer
Reilly, Clerical Officer
Healy, Graduate
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting and requested the suspension of Standing Order 22
to allow for the taking of photographs.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
To suspend Standing Order 22.
This was agreed.
1. Election of Mayor
Mayor Cubbard relayed his immense pride at having served as Mayor of Galway City for two
enjoyable but challenging years. He paid tribute to all frontline workers and referred to his great
honour at recently planting a tree at the Children's Millennium Park which will serve as a reminder
for generations to come to reflect on the incredibly challenging period faced by the entire world
and hopefully be of some comfort to those who have been affected and lost loved ones during
this pandemic.
Mayor Cubbard paid tribute to his fellow Councillors, Council staff, the Chief Executive, the Senior
Management Team, staff from the Mayoral Office, Corporate Service staff and the Mayoral driver
for their support during the last year. He also thanked the Litter Management crew who
continued efforts to keep our City in immaculate condition. He referred to terms such as social
distancing and close contacts which were not part of our vocabulary when he first took up the
role and to the redesigning of the city for outdoor dining, something we did not envisage. He said
that he had the great pleasure to witness voluntary and essential community services continue
to be provided and he thanked over 700 organisations for hosting events that he attended.
Minutes, Confi
Mayor of Galwv
2
Mayor Cubbard referred to challenges faced such as moving City Council meetings from City Hall
and the holding of meetings online and now in a hybrid setting. He advised that he tried to open
the doors to young people by visiting schools and using social media platforms to engage with
them and he found new ways to engage and comfort our older and more vulnerable neighbours.
Mayor Cubbard thanked his employer and the team at O'Leary Insurance, his parents and
extended family, and, in particular his wife Karen and family for their support during recent
difficult times. He concluded by saying that if his legacy is to be anything, he hopes it shows others
from a working-class background that anything is possible once you set your mind to it and do
not allow others tell you that you are not good enough.
Councillors extended compliments to Mayor Cubbard and his family and congratulated him on his
achievements during his term. The achievements and highlights were noted and acknowledged
and members thanked the outgoing Mayor for his courtesy and fairness, for demonstrating
resilience, enthusiasm and commitment to the role of Mayor and representing the city.
Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath expressed thanks and compliments to the Mayor on his behalf
and all the staff in Galway City Council noting that Cllr. Cubbard had represented the City with
dignity and pride during his term.
Cllr. M. Cubbard called for Nominations for the Position of Mayor of the City of Galway.
I. Cllr. C. Connolly was proposed by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty, and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and Cllr. F. Fahy spoke in favour of their proposal and outlined the qualities,
capabilities and experience of Cllr. C. Connolly having been first elected to the City Council in
2004.
11. Cllr. P. Keane was proposed by Cllr. J. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Cllr. J. Connolly spoke in favour of his proposal and the qualities, capabilities and experience of
Cllr. P. Keane.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a roll call vote requesting
Councillors to name the Councillor that they wished to elect to the role of Mayor of the city of
Galway of the two nominees, namely Cllr. C. Connolly or Cllr. P. Keane.
Roll Call Vote to elect the Mayor of the city of Galway
Candidates: Cllr. C. Connolly & Cllr. P. Keane
In favour of Cllr. C. Connolly: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. O. Hanley,
Cllr. C. Higgins, Cllr. E. Hoare, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. N. Murphy, Cllr. M. O'Connor &
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
In favour of Cllr. P. Keane: Cllr. l. Byrne, Cllr. A. Cheevers, Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe,
Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin & Cllr. D. McDonnell
In Favour of Cllr. P. Keane: 7 Abstain: O Present: 18
In Favour of Cllr. C. Connolly: 11
Cllr. C. Conn Ilycwas •eemed elected Mayor of the City of Galway
2
Mr. G. McMahon invited Mayor Connolly to wear the Mayor Chain and photographs were taken.
Councillors congratulated the Mayor on her election, and wished her well as Mayor for the year
ahead. The Chief Executive, also congratulated the Mayor and offered his continued support and
that of the staff of the City Council.
On taking the chair, Mayor C. Connolly spoke as Gaeilge firstly and thanked her proposer Cllr. T.
O'Flaherty and seconder Cllr. F. Fahy for their nomination. She thanked the outgoing Mayor Cllr.
M. Cubbard and her colleagues in the Council for their support. She also thanked the Council staff
and the people of Galway for their excellent work and support during this pandemic.
Mayor Connolly stated that it was an honour and a privilege to be elected Mayor of the city of
Galway. She informed the meeting that she had served as Deputy Mayor for three terms during
her time on the City Council. Some of her aspirations for positive change in the year ahead were
outlined including to protect and develop the economy and culture of Galway city, the housing
crisis, property tax, commercial rates, illegal dumping, social inclusion, implementation of aims
set out in the City Development Plan, disability friendly city and building on our links with sister
cities and friendship agreements. Mayor Connolly also expressed her thanks to her late parents
and her step mother stating how proud they would now be.
2. Election of Deputy Mayor
The Mayor invited nominations for the position of Deputy Mayor of Galway City.
I. Cllr. M. O'Connor was proposed by Cllr. C. Higgins, and seconded by Cllr. N. Murphy.
Cllr. C. Higgins and Cllr. N. Murphy spoke in favour of their proposal.
No other nomination was received.
The Mayor declared Cllr. M. O'Connor elected as Deputy Mayor.
Cllr. M. O'Connor thanked Cllr. C. Higgins and Cllr. N. Murphy for their nomination. She gave
special thanks to her husband Derek, her children, her mother whom she would be joining later
on and extended family. She referred to the inspiration she received from Senator P. O'Reilly of
the Green Party. She stated that with regard to equality 'if you can see it, you can be it' and
referenced her involvement in the establishment of a local caucus for women councillors. She
stated that she will carry out the role with dignity.
Councillors congratulated the Deputy Mayor on her election. The Chief Executive also
congratulated the Deputy Mayor on her election.
3
3. Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
(a) Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd (IPB) Appointment of One (1) Member (for a
period of one year). (Non Group — Appointment by Vote.)
Nominations
Cllr. E. Hoare was proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Cllr. D. McDonnell was proposed by Cllr. J. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. P. Keane.
11.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested the withdrawal of his name for the position.
Mayor C. Connolly deemed Cllr. E. Hoare elected.
(b) Galway Civic Trust Appointment of Two (2) Members (for a period of one year)
(Non Group — Appointment by Vote.)
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed to defer Item 3 (b). This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Cllr. J. Connolly proposed that the Council proceed to appoint two members, this was seconded
by Cllr. P. Keane.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that this be deferred to the September Ordinary meeting to allow
the Chief Executive time to get an update on the matter. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Following a discussion on the matter, the Chief Executive advised that he will seek an up-to-date
position and bring same back to Council as soon as possible. This was agreed.
4. To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
The practice has been that Ordinary Meetings are held on the second Monday of each month,
except for the month of August. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that meetings take place at 3.00pm on
the second Monday of each month, excluding August 2022. The motion was seconded by Cllr. F.
Fahy and agreed.
12th July, 2021
13th September, 2021
11th October, 2021
8th November, 2021
13th December, 2021
10th January, 2022
14th February, 2022
14th March, 2022
11th April, 2022
9th May, 2022
13th June, 2022
The Meetings Administrator invited Members to assemble socially distanced outside for
photographs of the new Council, as a robed body.
The Meeting concluded at 5.35 pm.
4