Minutes of Special Meeting (Notices of Motion) of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform on Monday 19th April, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, N. Murphy,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. R. Lehmann, Administrative Officer
Mr. C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention to
conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection.
Mayor Cubbard welcomed all to the meeting.
1. NOTICES OF MOTION
Mayor Cubbard referred to NOM 4/2021 submitted by Cllr. l. Byrne and invited Cllrs. N. McNelis; D.
McDonnell; l. Byrne and M.J. Crowe to speak as they had indicated their intention to speak on the
Motion near the end of the last Council Meeting held on Monday 12th April.
Mr. D. Mahon noted further details on the role and duties of the Park Warden following submission
of same from Cllr. Byrne and outlined an indicative resource requirement and costs for same should
such a service be established. He confirmed that the City Council would require Departmental
sanction for any new posts established and that a budget allocation for the posts would be required.
It was confirmed that there was no funding provision for same in 2021. He outlined the existing work
of the Recreation and Amenity team with volunteers in local parks and upcoming enhancements.
Councillors discussed NOM 4/2021 and points raised were noted. Matters raised included suggestion
that Council write to the Joint Policing Committee regarding Garda resources to deal with anti-social
behaviour.
d & Signa
Minut , Con
Mayor of Galway
1
Cllr. l. Byrne clarified that she did not envisage the role of the Park Wardens law
enforcement or that they would operate over 24 hours seven days a week. She advised that she saw
the role to include liaison with volunteer groups.
NOM 4/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. I. Byrne
Date Received: 31st January 2021 — Amended 18th February 2021
Raised under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business
at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021 and agreed for inclusion on the agenda for
Special meeting.
Supported by: Cllrs. A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; D. Lyons; F. Fahy; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; D. McDonnell; N. McNelis; N. Murphy; M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a week
in the main city parks to ensure that they are safe and of high maintenance for the benefit of
the public and of biodiversity.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed an amendment to NOM 4/2021 to add the word 'playgrounds' to the
motion. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on the amendment.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
'That playgrounds be inserted to l. Byrne's motion to read as follows:
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a
week in the main city parks and playgrounds to ensure that they are safe and of high
maintenance for the benefit of the public and of biodiversity.
In favour: Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. C. Higgins;
Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell; N. McNelis & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. J. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe; Cllr. P. Keane;
Cllr. N. Murphy & Cllr. M. O'Connor.
In Favour: 11 Against: 7 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was passed.
In line with Standing Orders the amendment now becomes the original Motion. Mr. G. McMahon
proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote on the Motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Galway City Council agrees on the need for full time on-the-grounds wardens seven days a
week in the main city parks and playgrounds to ensure that they are safe and of high
maintenance for the benefit of the public and of biodiversity.
In favour: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr.
N. Larkin/ N. McNelis; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M. O'Connor &
Cllr. T. O' lakeriy.
2
In Favour: 18 Against: O
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O Present: 18
Mayor Cubbard referred Councillors to NOM 18/2021 and noted that a response had issued in
relation to same.
Cllr. A. Cheevers requested that the motion remain on the agenda for consideration.
NOM 18/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 7th April 2021Submitted under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose
of dealing with urgent business at the April Council meeting held on 12th April 2021 and agreed
for inclusion on the agenda for Special meeting.
Supported by: Cllrs. I. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; M. Cubbard; O. Hanley; C. Higgins; E.
Hoare; P. Keane; N. Murphy & M. O'Connor.
I am calling on Galway City Council to make Cross street a permanent pedestrian street to
accommodate outdoor dining and to accommodate businesses in the area.
I also would like Galway City Council to look at other areas of the City that this could be also
made possible.
Response issued on 14th April 2021.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to agenda item 4(j) Tourism Infrastructure projects being progressed by
Galway City Council in 2021 which is due for discussion at the adjourned April Council meeting on
Monday 26th April and suggested that the motion be deferred and discussed at this meeting.
Cllr. A. Cheevers agreed that an overall plan for the city is required and requested that this Motion
be dealt with as the first item on the Agenda on Monday 26th April following agenda item 4(j). This
was agreed.
NOM 21/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Date Received: 3rd October 2020
Raised under Standing Order 34 as a motion for the purpose of dealing with urgent business
at the March Council adjournment meeting held on 22th March 2021 and agreed for inclusion
on the agenda for Special meeting.
'That Galway City Council declare a Climate and Biodiversity Emergency.'
Cllr. M. O'Connor referred to NOM 21/2020 and confirmed that she accepted and seconded a
proposed amended wording to same which was submitted by Cllr. P. Keane.
Cllr. P. Keane spoke on the Motion with the amended wording that he submitted and acknowledged
the work done by Cllr. I Byrne. There was general agreement by Councillors of the symbolic intent of
the Motion. Compliments were also paid to Mr. P. Batty, Executive Engineer for work in this area.
Cllr. F. Fahy complimented Cllr. M. O'Connor and Cllr. P. Keane on the work completed on this Motion.
He referred to recently received documentation and proposed that the Motion remain on the agenda
to be considered at the next adjourned Council meeting scheduled for Monday 26th April. This was
seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
3
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
That NOM 21/2020 as amended be deferred for consideration at the next scheduled Council
meeting on Monday 26th April 2021.
In favour: Cllr. F. Fahy; Cllr. C. Higgins; Cllr. E. Hoare & Cllr. D. Lyons
Against: Cllr. l. Byrne; Cllr. A. Cheevers; Cllr. C. Connolly; Cllr. J. Connolly; Cllr. M.J. Crowe;
Cllr. M. Cubbard; Cllr. O. Hanley; Cllr. P. Keane; Cllr. N. Larkin; Cllr. D. McDonnell;
N. McNelis; Cllr. N. Murphy; Cllr. M. O'Connor & Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
In Favour: 4 Against: 14 Abstain: O Present: 18
The Motion was defeated.
Councillors discussed the Motion as amended by Cllr. P. Keane and it was agreed unanimously to
approve the Motion.
NOM 21/2020 as amended.
Seconded: Cllr. M. O'Connor
Notice amended and submitted by: Cllr. P. Keane
Date Received: 20th April 2021
"Galway City Council fully endorses the content of the international "Leaders' Pledge for Nature'
prior to the UN Biodiversity Summit on 29th September 2020.
Specifically from this international declaration Galway City Council affirms its unequivocal
support and commitment to the statement in the said declaration that the Earth is in a state of
planetary emergency and the interdependent crises of biodiversity loss and ecosystem
degradation and climate change require urgent and immediate global action.
Galway City Council thus affirms its intention to earnestly tackle these very important challenges
under its remit though its implementation of the Irish Government's revised Climate Action Plan,
2021 (to be launched in Q2 2021) and also the implementation of the Climate Action and Low
Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2020 (to be enacted in the next (Q2) Oireachtas
legislative term).
Galway City Council will prepare a new Climate Action Plan following the launch of the
Government's Plan and the Council will also prepare a new Climate Mitigation Strategy for
Galway City Council.
Galway City Council will also prioritise the implementation of the City Council's Climate
Adaptation Strategy, 2019 (and, if necessary, in response to the Government's new plan, will
also prioritise updating this plan).
Priority will also be afforded to implementing the National Pollinator Plan in Galway along with
the City Council's Biodiversity Plan
The Motion was approved unanimously.
4
Councillor C. Higgins spoke on Motion NOM 64/2019. Councillors discussed same and there was
unanimous consensus in approving same.
Mr. McGrath said that any loss of life is a tragedy and informed Councillors of the huge work being
done in the background by Galway City Council on a multi-agency approach with a number of
organisations working together and with volunteer groups. He updated the Council on the proposed
expansion of thermal vector cameras; enhanced lighting and increased lifebuoy points.
Mayor Cubbard referenced the Galway Rescue Plan which is a co-ordinated plan including nine
agencies; five of which are blue light services. He commended the work of former Mayor, Cllr. N.
McNelis for his work in this area. Councillors discussed the Motion and matters raised included
Government policy; better mental health services and resources and insufficient capacity;
community services and early intervention; staffing; the role of HSE as a lead agency; Joint Policing
Committee; referenced the trojan work of a number of agencies and volunteer group Claddagh
Watch. It was noted that not all deaths were attributed to suicide and may be accidental in nature.
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising
meetings to combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective
actions that could be taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib.
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Mayor Cubbard spoke on Motion NOM 20/2020.
NOM 20/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received: 28th September 2020
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'Galway City Council call on the Government to immediately award all recommended medals to
the Irish Troops who were stationed at Jadotville in 1961. Commandant Pat Quinlan
recommended 5 medal's for Gallantry & 27 for distinguished conduct, these have yet to be
awarded. 8 of the 32 men are still alive, therefore we call on the Government to make this a
priority.'
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Cllr. F. Fahy confirmed that he had received a response to NOM 24/2020 and requested that it be
removed from the agenda. This was noted.
NOM 24/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Date Received: 6th July 2020
'l propose that in order to facilitate Dine in Galway and to support the businesses of the City that
parking in the City on street and in Council car parks be free until 12 noon everyday to encourage
people to come into the city.'
5
Response issued on 16th April 2021.
Cllr. O. Hanley spoke on NOM 25/2020 and sought to have an improved meetings structure for Area
Committee Meeting to work with area staff and to agree potential projects in an area.
Councillors discussed same and raised a number of queries regarding operation and administration
of Cllr. Hanley's proposal.
The Chief Executive advised that in the coming months he will arrange for a Report to be prepared
in advance of Councillors consideration of Local Property Tax and in preparation for Budget 2022.
NOM 25/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 16th October 2020
Seconded by: Cllr. E. Hoare
'That Galway City Council prepare a report for the creation of Local Property Tax Guidelines for
Galway City Council. Under these guidelines a portion of LPT monies raised within a local ward
will be retained to be allocated within that ward as agreed by the local area committee, to
enable area committees to target priorities within their own area. The rate at which that portion
is retained shall be decided at the same Council meeting of which the LPT variation rate is
decided.'
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Mr. G. McMahon confirmed that a response had issued to Cllr. A. Cheevers. This was noted.
NOM 29/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 2nd November 2020
'Calling on Galway City Council to provide Public Cycle repair stations across the cycling network
across the City I believe this is vital also as part of the implementation of new cycle network
currently happening across the city'.
Response issued on 16th April 2021.
Cllr. D. Lyons spoke Motion NOM 1/2021. He acknowledged the reply received on the matter but
he wished to raise safety concerns and for the Motion to be re-considered.
NOM 1/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date Received: 2nd January 2021
Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Responses issued: 5th January 2021 — Request to resubmit for Agenda
That Galway City Council would as a matter of urgency install traffic lights at the Clybaun
Road/Shangort Road junction. This junction has become very busy of late with traffic coming
from the Kingston Road direction, exiting Joyce's Supermarket and from the Western Distributor
Road down Clybaun Road. The increased traffic levels has led to a number of traffic accidents at
the junction.
The Motion was approved unanimously.
6
Cllr. N. McNelis spoke on NOM 5/2021. Councillors discussed the Motion and following
suggestions Cllr. McNelis agreed to amend the wording of same. Cllr. D. McDonnell seconded the
Motion confirming that he did not wish for the greenway to be developed on the rail line but
alongside the development of the railway.
NOM 5/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
In light of the findings of the recently published reports on the future development of the
disused Western Rail Corridor from Athenry to Claremorris, and the commencement of public
consultation on the development of the Athlone to Galway greenway, this Council supports the
development of both greenways, from Athlone to Galway, and Athenry to Claremorris, on the
basis that their development will drive tourism and economic growth across the West, with
Galway City being the ultimate destination for users of both greenways.
NOM 5/2021 with amended wording
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Galway City Council supports the development of a greenway from Athenry to Claremorris, and
the ongoing public consultation on the development of the Athlone to Galway greenway, this
Council supports the development of both greenways, from Athlone to Galway, and Athenry to
(the latter being adjacent to the existing railway line), on the basis that their
Claremorris, ,
development will drive tourism and economic growth across the West, with Galway City being
the ultimate destination for users of both greenways.
The Motion was approved unanimously.
Cllr. N. McNelis spoke on NOM 6/2021. Councillors approved same unanimously.
NOM 6/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: ISt February 2021
This Council recognises that-
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
For many people, particularly younger women we know that period poverty, or the
inability to afford period products that meet your needs is an issue. Using period
products for longer periods of time than is recommended or using unsuitable
alternatives can lead to infections and health issues. We recognise that this is both a
health and justice issue.
Period injustice has huge knock on effects for women, girls and trans people who may
feel they have no choice but to miss out on educational activities, work or recreation due
to not having appropriate products.
This Council commends the Scottish Government in making available period products
free of charge in their schools, educational institutions, and public buildings.
This Council further supports the Period Products (Free Provision) Bill 2021 currently in
the Oireachtas.
The Motion was approved unanimously.
7
NOM 7/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 11th February 2021
That Galway City Council calls on the Office of Public Works to carry out the necessary excavation
works to recover the remains of Joe Brady, Daniel Curley, Michael Fagan, Thomas Caffrey and
Tim Kelly, in what is commonly known as the Invincibles Yard at Kilmainham Gaol. The bodies of
these five members of the Irish National Invincibles lie beneath the paving slabs of the yard
where they were executed in 1883 for their part in thePhoenix Park assassinations. The families
of the five men are represented by the NationalGraves Association and the wish of the families
is for their relatives to be exhumed from Kilmainham Gaol and reinterred in consecrated ground
at Glasnevin Cemetery.'
Not Considered
Cllr. O. Hanley discussed Motion NOM 8/2021.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested that NOM 10/2021 be considered in tandem with Cllr. O. Hanley's
Motion and suggested that the second paragraph of her Motion, in particular be included. Cllr.
O' Hanley agreed to this addition.
NOM 8/2021 with addition of text from Cllr. C. Connolly.
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 25th February 2021
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
That Galway City Council recognises that Section 183 of the Local Government Act, is one of
the most important reserved functions delegated to elected members.
The proposed removal of the Section 183 reserved function of Elected Members in relation to
the disposal of local authority held land to the LDA as provided for in Part 7 Section 56 of the
bill is unacceptable and an affront to Local Democracy. As advocates for the empowerment of
local government, we can never support or accept any diminution in the reserved functions
and powers of Elected Members.
- That this Council opposes the provisions in the Land Development Agency 2021 Bill (to be
enacted) which overrides the decision making of elected members regarding the transfer or
sale of public land. That this Bill would further undermine local democracy and the work of our
Council Executive in the proper planning of our county/city and our local communities.
- That this Council will continue to actively engage with the Dept. of Housing to utilise and
implement housing models that will provide social and affordable housing for the people of
Galway and retain the ability to plan for the associated infrastructure of such developments.
That this Council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government
demanding an immediate halt to the progression of the Land Development Agency Bill 2021,
that the Minister engage in consultation with Local Authorities and that the Council invites the
Minister to meet with Councillors to discuss this further.
8
NOM 8/2021 Original Motion
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 25th February 2021
That Galway City Council recognises that Section 183 of the Local Government Act, is one of
the most important reserved functions delegated to elected members.
- That this Council opposes the provisions in the Land Development Agency 2021 Bill (to be
enacted) which overrides the decision making of elected members regarding the transfer or
sale of public land. That this Bill would further undermine local democracy and the work of our
Council Executive in the proper planning of our county/city and our local communities.
- That this Council will continue to actively engage with the Dept. of Housing to utilise and
implement housing models that will provide social and affordable housing for the people of
Galway and retain the ability to plan for the associated infrastructure of such developments.
- That this Council agrees to write to the Minister for Housing and Local Government
demanding an immediate halt to the progression of the Land Development Agency Bill 2021,
that the Minister engage in consultation with Local Authorities and that the Council invites the
Minister to meet with Councillors to discuss this further.
NOM 10/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
I am calling on Galway City Council to make a formal submission to the Minister for Housing,
Local Government & Heritage outlining our complete opposition to the proposed provisions of
the Land Development Agency Bill 2021.
The proposed removal of the Section 183 reserved function of Elected Members in relation to
the disposal of local authority held land to the LDA as provided for in Part 7 Section 56 of the
bill is unacceptable and an affront to Local Democracy. As advocates for the empowerment of
local government, we can never support or accept any diminution in the reserved functions
and powers of Elected Members.
I also have concerns regarding the potential long-term implications for local authorities in
delivering social and affordable housing on local authority held land due to the extensive remit
of the LDA. I believe that this is a major battle in our ongoing fight to preserve the local
democratic function in the face of ever-increasing centralism.
Cllrs. N. Murphy; N. McNelis; E. Hoare and T. O'Flaherty indicated their expression to speak.
Mayor Cubbard concluded the meeting at 16.57 p.m.
NOM 9/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: ISt March 2021
That Galway City Council will write to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment that
international trade agreements, such as CETA providing a right to multi-national corporations
to sue Ireland outside of the ordinary legal and democratic systems, should be fully and
properly scrutinised by the Oireachtas before ratification.
Not Considered.
9
NOM 13/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd March 2021
On foot of recent events, this Council calls on the NTMA to cease all and any dealings with
'Davy' forthwith
Not Considered.
NOM 15/2021
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 16th March 2021
Calling on Galway City Council to discontinue the distribution of printed payslips to councillors
and staff by post and for all payslips to be electronically distributed. Cost savings in
administration, printing, paper and postage should be redistributed to the environmental
section of Galway City Council.
Not Considered.
10