Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
held on Monday 20th January, 2020 at 3.00 p.m.
in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, O. Crowe, F. Fahy,
O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty and P. O' Reilly.
Apologies: M.J. Crowe
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
. B. Barrett, Senior Executive Officer
Mr
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. T.
Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. Liam Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Mayor proposed that the items on the Agenda be taken as follows: Item I(a), 2(d), 2(e),
4(e), 4(a) & 4(d). This was agreed. Cllr. O. Hanley proposed that the meeting conclude at 7.30
p.m. This was seconded by Cllr. M. O' Connor and agreed. The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath
advised that he would be departing the meeting at 5p.m. for a pre-scheduled transportation
meeting and would return at 7p.m.
Cllr. C. Higgins requested that Item 4(e) be dealt with first. Mayor Cubbard advised that the
agenda as agreed including the business prescribed by statue would be dealt with.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 9th December 2019
The Meetings Administrator outlined a correction to the draft December minutes where Mr.
D. Mahon was referred to as Mr. D. McMahon within the document. The correction was
noted.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. F. Fahy
Motion to Adopt Item 1 (a) — Draft Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Ga Iway City Council,
9th December 2019
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Draft Minutes were Adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(d) Disposal of Leasehold Interest - Hynes' Car Park
Mr. G. McMahon referred Councillors to the notice circulated on 10th January 2020 regarding
the proposal to dispose of the leasehold interest in the Ground Floor of the Multi-Storey Car
Park, at Hynes Yard, Merchants Road to Amber Ventures Limited. Mr. McMahon confirmed
that the car park has 79 surface car parking spaces. The consideration of €130,000 per annum
with rent reviews every 6 years & break clause at year 12 for both parties was outlined. The
term is for 20 years effective from 01 December 2019.
Councillors discussed the proposed disposal of the leasehold interest and raised a number of
issues and concerns.
Mr. G. McMahon advised that the City Council retains ownership of Hynes Yard ground floor
which is leased for use as a carpark. He advised that the proposed increase in annual rent is
from €120,000 to €130,000. He confirmed that issues raised by Councillors will be brought to
the attention of the operators for consideration. The Chief Executive also responded to
queries raised in detail.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that a report with the figures regarding the break clause be provided
to Councillors. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly who also raised the issue of a right of
way allegedly closed on Merchant's Road. The Chief Executive confirmed that a separate
report will be provided regarding this matter.
Cllr. P. O' Reilly requested the addition to this Report of the cost to break the lease and
potential return to the City Council of other income, should the space be used for other uses.
This was agreed to be included in the Motion.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
"That a Report be provided including figures regarding the break clause, the cost to break the
lease and potential return to the City Council of other income, should the space be used for
other uses."
In Favour: 9 Against: 8 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was assed.
21 Page
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the adoption of Item 2(d) per report circulated. This was seconded
by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed an amendment to the Motion, which was seconded by Cllr. C. Higgins.
In line with Standing Orders the Amendment shall be put first.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. C. Higgins
"That this Agenda Item be deferred pending receipt of a full Report and the submission of
Questions by Councillors"
In Favour: 8 Against: 9 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Amendment was defeated.
The original Motion was then voted upon.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"Proposal to adopt under Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, and Section 211 of
the Local Government (Planning & Development) Act, 2000 - Disposal of the leasehold
interest in the Ground Floor of the Multi Storey Car Park, at Hynes Yard, Merchants Road to
Amber Ventures Limited - per Report circulated on 10th January 2020".
In Favour: 9 Against: 8 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
2 (e) Disposal of lands adjacent to 12 Léana Theas, Cappagh Rd. Galway
Mr. T. Connell referred Councillors to the notice circulated on 10th January 2020 regarding the
proposed disposal of land in the ownership of Galway City Council adjacent to No. 12 Léana
Theas, Cappagh Road, Galway to 1 Barna Woods Land Limited. He confirmed the area of site
as 0.007 Hectares (70 sq. metres) in lands zoned Recreational & Amenity (RA). Mr. Connell
referred to the Map outlining the area in question.
Mr. T. Connell advised that the site is part of a new Housing Development on Cappagh Road.
The developers of the estate inadvertently incorporated this small portion of land when they
developed the garden of 12 Léana Theas. The owners now wish to purchase this land to rectify
the matter. The value of the land including compensation to the Council is reflected in the
sale price of €35,000.
Councillors discussed the Report in detail and raised a number of issues and concerns.
The Chief Executive responded to queries raised in detail. He then referred Members to two
further Maps on display at the Meeting. On Map no. 2, Mr. B. McGrath advised that the
Developer has agreed to transfer a portion of land at no cost in order to straighten an area of
3 IP age
land along the road boundary at Cappagh Park.
In response to questions from Cllr. D. Lyons, the Chief Executive referred to a piece of land
displayed as Map no. 3; where he advised Councillors that Galway City Council have agreed to
purchase 7.25 acres of land subject to contract. This land is immediately to the North of
Cappagh Park with potential future access to the N6 Ring Road. He confirmed the purchase
price of €105,000, which is considerably below market value. Councillors expressed
satisfaction with the addition of these lands.
The Mayor called a Vote on the following:
Proposed: Cllr. J. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
To adopt under S183 Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Local Government
(Planning & Development) Act, 2000 - Disposal of Freehold of Lands adjacent to 12 Léana
Theas, Cappagh Road, Galway - per Report circulated on 10th January 2020.
In Favour: 16 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4 (e) Cappagh Park All-Weather Facility
Mr. D. Mahon referred Councillors to the detailed report circulated on 17th January 2020
regarding the Knocknacarra All Weather Pitch. He explained the proposal for a permanent
lighting solution, the on-line booking system and the proposal for a regional aquatic and
fitness centre. With regards to the production and validity of appropriate assessment, Mr.
Mahon advised that the site is located adjacent to the Galway Bay Complex Special Area of
Conservation (SAC). Therefore the proposed floodlighting (whether permanent or temporary)
is required to have due regard of the EU Habitats Directive.
At 2.15 p.m. Deputy Mayor, Cllr. D. Lyons took the Chair. Mayor Cubbard resumed the chair
at 2.19 p.m.
Councillors raised a number of concerns regarding the Cappagh Park facility including the lack
of temporary lighting in the coming months, the online booking system and communication
with the National Parks and Wildlife Service.
The Chief Executive departed the meeting to attend another meeting, as advised to
Councillors and he confirmed that he would return at 7 p.m.
Cllr. C. Higgins proposed a Notice of Motion in writing "That Galway City Council installs
temporary directional lighting at Cappagh Park as per recommendation from NPW with
immediate effect in order to provide adequate facilities for the soccer community in
Knocknacarra and Salthill". This motion was seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare. A discussion followed
41 page
with regards to the legality of the Motion in line with Standing Order no. 38. A vote was not
taken.
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
To defer Item 4(e) until the Chief Executive returns at 7pm.
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed unanimously.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed a break. This was seconded by Cllr. M. O' Connor and agreed. Cllr.
O. Crowe proposed in writing "that Westside Running Track, Playing facilities in Westside and
Doughiska Park be fully floodlighted in the next 18 months. This was seconded by Cllr. E.
Hoare. Mr. D. Mahon advised that this could be considered under Agenda Item 2 (b) Annual
Service Delivery Plan 2020. No vote was taken on this motion.
Mr. D. Mahon confirmed that Part VIII application is scheduled for inclusion on the Agenda of
the May Council Meeting, at the earliest and data regarding the booking system will be
provided to Councillors.
Councillors rose at 5:43 p.m. The Meeting resumed at 6:05 p.m. Mayor Cubbard agreed to
take a Notice of Motion submitted by Cllr. E. Hoare and a vote was taken on same:
NOM 02/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Date Received: 13th January 2020
That Galway City Council gives its full support to Newcastle Combined Community Centre
Association in their efforts to obtain Urban Regeneration and Development Funding in 2020.
This funding will be used to part fund the proposed development of a Community and Wellness
Centre located in Newcastle, Galway.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
The Meetings Administrator, Mr. McMahon suggested that Councillors may wish to consider
amending the date of the February Ordinary Meeting scheduled for Monday 10th February,
as the General Election Count is expected to still be underway at this stage. The matter was
discussed and it was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin that the Ordinary Meeting remain at the
original scheduled date.
Proposed: Cllr. N. Larkin Seconded: Cllr. J. Connolly
"That the Ordinary February Council Meeting be held at 3 p.m. on Monday 10th February
2020, as scheduled".
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was passed unanimously.
51 Page
4(a) An Bord Pleanéla Reference 305982-19 Strategic Housing Development at Gort na Br6,
Rahoon, Galway — Information in accordance with the requirements of the Planning &
Development Act 2016 Section 8 (4) ( c) (iii)
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services referred the Members to the detailed report circulated
with the agenda regarding a Strategic Housing Development application submitted to An Bord
Pleanåla comprising 332 no. apartments, creche and all associated site works at Gort na Brå,
Rahoon, Galway. Ms. McNally set out the legislative background to such applications and
highlighted that it was An Board Pleanåla that makes the decision in relation to this type of
application and not Galway City Council. She further confirmed that under the legislation, the
local authority must bring the application to the attention of the Elected Members. She
circulated a Guidance document prepared by An Bord Pleanåla for Planning Authorities which
sets out the role of local authorities in relation to such applications which includes the
requirement for pre-planning consultation.
Ms. McNally also confirmed that the Chief Executive is required to prepare a report on such
applications within the statutory deadline in this instance the 27th January, 2020 and any
submissions or observations from the Elected Members will be incorporated in this report. In
response to a request for clarification as to why this specific application was listed on a Council
agenda when other similar applications were not, Ms. McNally confirmed that such
applications are normally discussed at relevant Area Committee level, in this case the West
area, but due to the nature of concerns raised by the Members and the unavailability of key
staff at the most recent meeting of this committee, the Members requested that this be listed
for discussion at a full meeting of the Council and the Mayor had agreed to this.
A lengthy discussion ensued and a number of Councillors referred to the SHD process and the
erosion of democratic mandate. General concerns were raised by Councillors regarding the
scale and design of the development and its non-compliance with the Galway City
Development Plan 2017 - 2023 specifically its strategic vision; the area of site used for
residential densities calculation and plot ratio; design statement, excessive height,
overshadowing and overlooking; the mix of units; communal and open spaces; lack of public
transportation, increased traffic congestion; inadequate créche, play, cycling and parking
facilities; requirement to protect residential amenity in the outer suburb and the lack of
connectivity to the City Centre, close proximity to Gaelscoil Mhic Amhlaigh, child
safeguarding, the proposed future tenure of the apartments; rights of way, and future
amenities. A number of Councillors advised that they had made individual submissions to An
Bord Pleanåla with regards to this application.
At 18:25 Cllr. D. Lyons, Deputy Mayor took the Chair as Mayor Cubbard departed the Meeting.
Ms. R. McNally provided clarification in relation to a number of specific queries raised and
suggested that given the consensus in views across the chamber that the Members consider
adopting a Motion to consolidate the concerns raised and this would be included as part of
the Chief Executive's report to the Board.
Cllr. M. O' Connor queried the absence of Mayor Cubbard who had departed on Mayoral
business.
Page
The Chief Executive returned at 19:03 p.m. and there was further discussion regarding
Cappagh Park All-Weather facility. The Chief Executive agreed that a further meeting with the
Knocknacarra Football Club will be arranged.
The following Motion was then submitted in writing and a vote taken on same:
Proposed: Cllr. J. Connolly
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"That the Members of Galway City Council determines that the location of
Knocknacarra District Centre" is not a central and/or accessible urban location.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was unanimously agreed.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
"the
(a) Filling of Vacancy on a Committee or Approved Body - Northern and Western Regional Assembly -
following the resignation of Cllr. Declan McDonnell — Not considered.
(b) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2020— Not considered.
(c) Galway Harbour Company - Due Diligence in context of National Ports Policy and the Harbours Act,
2015 — Not considered.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
NONE
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b) Galway City European Green Leaf 2017 Final Report - Not considered.
(c) Quarterly Report, October to December 2019 — Not Considered
vi.
Transport & Infrastructure
Housing — Report attached.
Environment & Climate Change.
Recreation & Amenity
Economic Development & Culture
Community & Sports Development
(d) Chief Executive's Report —
1. December 2019 - Not Considered
2. January 2020 - Not Considered
71 Page
5. NOTICES OF MOTION
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
NOM 18/2019
Supported by Cllrs: M. O'Connor, O. Hanley, M. Cubbard, C. Connolly, T. O'Flaherty, D.
Lyons, N. McNelis, D. McDonnell, N. Larkin
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity emergency is
evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of civil
society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising transport,
energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the Climate
Emergency
Response issued 8th July 2019. Motion to remain on the Agenda.
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
NOM 19/2019
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning, Community
and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority Area for the
display of authorised election material
That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
That all election candidates be given equal space for display
That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down by law
Not considered
NOM 25/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to introduce a national deposit and refund scheme specifically for
aluminium cans and plastic bottles.
Not considered.
NOM 26/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the Government to immediately
i. Review the changes made under FEMPI to allowances paid to members of the Defence Forces.
ii. Establish a permanent Defence Forces Pay Commission.
iii. Initiate a major recruitment drive to stem the decline in numbers of Defence force personnel.
Not considered.
8 | Page
NOM 34/2019
Notice given by: Mayor M. Cubbard
Supported by Cllrs: N. McNelis, C. Connolly, D. McDonnell, P. O'Reilly, O. Hanley, T.
O'Flaherty, M. O'Connor, D. Lyons, N. Larkin
Date Received: 24th June 2019
I propose that Galway City Council write to Minister Katherine Zappone and request that her Department
acknowledge Adoptee Identity Rights and immediately allows Adoptees access their personal information
regarding Health, History and Heritage in line with the equality and personal autonomy rights of other citizens
in Ireland.
Not considered.
NOM 41/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date received: 30th July 2019
"Galway City Council would develop a calendar of commemorative occasions in 2020 marking the centenary of
the significant events of the War of Independence that occurred in Galway during 1920 including but not
exclusive to:
The Murder of Sean Mulvoy at Galway Railway Station and the Murder of Seamus Quirke in
September 1920.
The Murder of Michael Walsh, a member of the then Urban District Council.
The execution of Patrick Joyce a teacher of Barna NS.
The Murder of Fr Michael Griffin, a then Curate in the Parish of St Josephs.
The Murder of Joe Howley OC of the Mid Galway Brigade of the Republican Forces."
Not considered.
NOM 43/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 22nd August 2019
That this Council writes to the Minister for Justice and Equality Charlie Flanagan T.D. and the Minister of State
for Justice at the Department of Justice and Equality with special responsibility for Equality, Immigration and
Integration David Staunton T.D., calling for the closure of all Galway based Direct Provision Centres and instead,
offer residents suitable, community-based accommodation and services for children and families.
Not considered.
NOM 44/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 2nd Sept 2019
"In light of a recent appeal to the EU from 180 scientists and doctors from 36 countries warning about the
danger of 5G, which will lead to massive increase in involuntary exposure to electromagnetic radiation, that
GCC in exercising its responsibility to protect the environment and the public from harm.
Opposes the roll-out of 5G in the City and
Calls on Comm Reg to deny licensing for its roll-out and
Calls on the Minister for Communication, Climate Change and Environment to establish a working group to
establish the facts about radiation impact of 5G on the environment and human health due to the current
questionable scientific knowledge."
Not considered.
91
Page
NOM 46/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd September 2019
I call on this council to either cut back or remove overgrown trees that are blocking road signs
throughout the city boundary.
Not considered.
NOM 47/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 3rd September 2019
That this Council create a study to investigate future pedestrianisation of streets located in the city
centre core. This study will be presented to elected members and would specifically recommend which
streets would be most favourable to pedestrianisation by taking into account factors including but not
limited to: condition of street as exists, impacts on footfall, future transportation plans, accessibility
access, the amount of local residents and businesses that would need to be consulted with, benefits of
pedestrianisation for area.
Not considered.
NOM deferred from Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 23rd September 2019
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty
NOM 53/2019
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that this council seek funding from the NTA to remove the Skerrit Roundabout and to replace
it with traffic lights.
Not considered.
NOM 54/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 8th October 2019
This local authority write to Paschal Donohoe T.D, Minister for Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform
stating that "Eurostat has confirmed that the Northern and Western Region, which includes our local
authority, has moved back from a 'Developed Region' to 'Region in Transition and considering that this
points to a two speed national economy, how is the Minister proposing to address it; is there opportunity
for positive discrimination? Can the Minister also confirm that European Regional Development Funding
will continue to be delivered in the regions post 2020?
Not considered.
NOM 57/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Date Received: 14th October 2019
That this Council calls on a ban on vaping in all public buildings including schools, hospitals etc. and all
workplaces throughout the City of Galway.
Not considered.
NOM 61/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 25th October 2019
I am calling on Galway City Council in conjunction with Galway County Council to look at a pilot scheme
for a park and ride from Galway airport facility to service Parkmore and city for Galway commuters.
Not considered.
10 | Page
NOM 63/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 11th November 2019
That Galway City Council would allocate 10% of its Transport Budget to Cycling
Not considered.
NOM 64/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 14th November 2019
Galway City Council agrees to discuss with relevant stakeholders the possibility of organising meetings to
combat the loss of life on the River Corrib. Such meetings would explore effective actions that could be
taken to improve safety concerns on the River Corrib
Not considered.
NOM 65/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 21st November 2019
That the Transport Department follow-up with recent comments by Minister for Transport Shane Ross
that funding will be made available for bicycle traffic lights to Local Authorities and that were possible
Galway City Council will incorporate bicycle traffic lights as a core planning element of cycling
infrastructure as it exists as well as with the future rollout of cycle lanes
Not considered.
NOM 66/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 27th November 2019
Galway City Council will organise a designated member of staff to act as a liaison officer with the traders
committee on market issues at St. Nicholas Market
Not considered.
NOM 68/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Date Received: 2nd December 2019
I call on Galway City Council to introduce a 30KM speed limit throughout all of the residential estates
within the City Boundary
Not considered.
NOM 69/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 4th December 2019
Galway City Council calls to expand the remit of IPB Insurance to provide public liability insurance, at an
affordable rate, to community events and festivals that are otherwise unable to source affordable
insurance. We also call on other local authorities, Regional Assemblies and ETBs to also ask for this
motion to be supported.
Not considered.
NOM 70/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 17th December 2019
I'm calling on Galway City Council Executive to implement a Seven day Maintenance contract for traffic
lights management right across Galway City.
Not considered.
11 | Page
NOM 71/2019
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 17th December 2019
I'm calling on transportation section of Galway City Council to carry out a full audit on all disabled spaces
including spaces that are not clearly identified with partial marking as these required to brought up to
the recognised standard. I want the audit to include accessibility & suitability for disabled permit holders
Not considered.
NOM 01/2020
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Date Received: 5th January 2020
To ask City Council that in the interests of developing sustainable transport solutions to consider the
appointment of a cycling officer who would promote cycling in the city, provide information and safety
awareness, audit school cycling routes and develop 'walking bus routes'. If this proposal is supported a
cycling officer should also be tasked with establishing a Cycle Forum and be responsible for overseeing
the formulation and delivery of the local cycling policy for the City.
Response issued with Agenda 15th January 2020.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 1/2020
Question given by: Cllr. O. Hanley
Date Received: 2nd January 2020
Has the Council invited Bus Éireann to send a representative to outline current and future bus services in
Galway to the Transport SPC and the main Council following on from the motion in October by Cllr. J.
Connolly? What was their response?
Response issued with Agenda 15th January 2020.
Q 2/2020
Question given by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Date Received: 13th January 2020
Following a commitment given at a meeting I organised with Deputy Noel Grealish on July 24, 2014 —
attended by Mr. Ray O' Dwyer, Head of Operations for Irish Water; Mr. Tim O' Connor, Irish Water;
Galway City Council Chief Executive Mr. Brendan McGrath; former Head of Finance Ms. Edel McCormack;
— that the bathing water in Ballyloughane would be
and former Senior Engineer Mr. Ray Brennan
prioritised, and that remedial works would be carried out to bring the water up to an acceptable
standard, I am now requesting a full report on the issue. I request a detailed report on all remedial works
carried out by Irish Water and Galway City Council, and also the costs involved in carrying out these
works. I am also seeking details of any further remedial works that may be necessary, and a commitment
that any such works will be carried out as a matter of urgency.
Not considered.
12 | Page
7.
CORRESPONDENCE
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed the noting of Correspondence under Agenda Item no. 7. This was
seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
(a) Correspondence from Jim Meade, Chief Executive, larnr6d Éireann dated 4th
December 2019
(b) Correspondence from Waterford City & County Council dated 9th December 2019
(c) Correspondence from Kerry County Council dated 17th December 2019
(d) E-mail from Waste Policy & Resource Efficiency Division, Dept. of Communications,
Climate Action & Environment dated 30th December 2019
The pro osal was unanimously agreed.
8.
9.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
None.
CONFERENCES
Conferences were proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell and approved.
(a) Title: 31st Colmcille Winter School
Date: 28th & 29th February 2020
Venue: Letterkenny, Co. Donegal
Approved Training
(b) Title: AILG Module 1 —"GDPR — An updated briefing for Elected Members on the operation
and implications of GDPR"
Date & Venue: 23rd January 2020— Hotel Kilkenny
20— Mullingar Park Hotel
Module 2 — "The evelopment Plan Making Process — A briefing for Elected
VMéÆbers"
13Y!.Fe5r.uary. 020 — Hotel Kilmore, Dublin Road, Cavan
Date & Venue: 15th February 2020 — Dooley's Hotel, The Quay, Waterford
The following Councillors were approved to attend: Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. T. O'Flaherty,
Cllr. F. Fahy & Cllr. E. Hoare
13
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Item 10— Votes of Sympathy and Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. McNelis and seconded
by Cllr. Lyons as follows:
Sympathies
• Paddy Mulhall, R.I.P.
• Mary Folan, R.I.P.
Congratulations
• Alan Glynn
• Corofin GAA
11. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING None
12. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The Meeting concluded at 7.30pm.
The Chief Executive referred to Agenda Item 4(d)(2) under Item 4.20 in the January Chief Executive
Report. As the Meeting had exceeded the time set for its conclusion by the Councillors, the issue
could not be dealt with. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed in writing that a Special Meeting be held on Monday
27th January 2020 at IO a.m. to discuss Galway 2020 and relevant matters. This was supported by
Cllrs. McNelis, McDonnell, Larkin, Hoare, Higgins, Fahy and O' Flaherty.
Mayor of Galway
14 | Page