Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council held in Leisureland,
Salthill and virtually on zoom platform on Monday 20th September, 2021 at 3.00
Presiding:
Present:
Present Virtually:
Apologies:
In Attendance:
In Attendance Virtually:
p.m.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne; A. Cheevers; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe;
O. Hanley; E. Hoare; P. Keane N. McNelis; N. Murphy
& M. O'Connor
Councillors: M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; C. Higgins;
D. Lyons; D. McDonnell & T. O'Flaherty
Cllr.
N. Larkin
P. Philbin, Director of Services
MS.
P. Greene, Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
D. Smyth, A/Head of Finance
Mr.
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services
Mr.
E. Naughton, Head of ICT
Ms.
M. O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
C. Kelly, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr.
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer
Mr. F. McEvoy, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. D. Skene, Senior Executive Engineer
Mr. P. Glynn, Executive Engineer
Mr. M. Lally, Executive Engineer
Ms. A. Finn, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. C. Morgan, Administrative Officer
Ms. T. Donohue, Staff Officer
Mr. M. McDonagh, Assistant Staff Officer
Ms. H. Kilbride, Clerical Officer
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator commenced the meeting with a statement of intention
to conduct the business of the meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent
reflection. He confirmed that the duration of meeting would be 1 hour 55 minutes in line with the
agreed protocol for meetings. He requested attendees to wear a face covering when moving around
the facility.
Mayor of Galwq
1
Mayor C. Connolly welcomed all to the meeting and proposed that each Quarterly Report be taken
in tandem with matters outlined in the Chief Executive's Reports relating to that programme area
and that Transport and Infrastructure be considered first. This was agreed.
Some Councillors reported difficulty accessing the meeting via zoom technology as in error the zoom
code for a previous meeting was sent with the Covid health questionnaire declaration that morning.
The correct zoom that was issued with the agenda for the meeting was re-issued to Councillors to
enable them to join the meeting.
1. Quarterly Report, April - June 2021
i. Transport & Infrastructure
2. Chief Executive's Report:
July 2021
ii. September 2021
Councillors discussed the quarterly report and Chief Executive's Reports for July and September
2021 on matters relating to the Transportation & Infrastructure function. A summary of matters
raised and clarifications included:
Bus Shelters and the timeline for delivery of same; query if metrics to examine if there is more
bus usage since their installation; lighting required at some bus shelters; request for a bus shelter
near the Spar shop in Roscam; where required width of 3.3m is not available can the Council
examine alternative locations and liaise with transport providers;
Park and Ride - whether other sites were assessed including the airport site and the use of a
shared space; GAA facilities or use of smaller hubs; status of racecourse consultations and the
importance of the service for retail in Galway city with Christmas approaching; location of Park
and Ride office and if they will have any remit regarding affordable city centre parking;
examination of lands adjacent to Cappagh Park for suitability;
The calling for a local National Transport Office in Galway;
Outdoor enhancements locations and if these will be maintained; request for picnic tables for
the Ballyloughane area;
Request for an update on ePlanning; costs involved and if national funding available for the
scheme;
Status of staff working arrangements in the Transportation section;
Have all positions been filled;
Active travel and consultation process for same;
Request for the replacement of promenade benches that were removed due to wear and tear;
Request for a report on anomalies identified in audit of existing speed limit signage in the city;
if new signage will be erected and if any issues identified; request for repeater speed limit
signage on B6thar na dTreabh and reference to the presence of speed vans at this location; will
Speed Limit Byelaws come before Council again to change limits;
Welcoming the School streets pilot scheme and if any plans to extend same;
When will parklets be rolled out across the city;
A number of Councillors referred to Kirwan Roundabout and sought an update on same;
concerns were raised regarding traffic issues in the Terryland Business Park and Tuam Road; rat
running in local estates and traffic on the Dyke Road and the need for footpaths, in particular,
underthe Quinceotennial Bridge; if signage could be enhanced; overhanging signage; reference
2
to improved light sequencing; request for current fencing at a section between local housing
and the junction to be replaced with a wall/hedging to reduce sound and for safety; query if any
audit on improvements to the junction; following monitoring of the junction what results have
been achieved and have objectives been met; request for consideration of a yellow box road
marking to allow traffic to turn right to Liosbaun Industrial Estate.
Salthill parking survey — when will results be available; lack of consultation with businesses in
the area;
Trial of smartmicro radar detectors and detection of buses at the junction to allow for bus
priority; reference to drives being distracted contributing to delays at light signal junctions with
the suggestion for the use of countdown timers or use of amber light before green lights to give
an indication to drivers of a time period expected;
Silverstrand - query if fines issued for non-compliance for parking on double yellow lines and
reference to the wand bollards provided near the double yellow lines.
Request to examine the turn off into Renmore Park on the Dublin Road following a tragic
accident;
Parkmore Package NTA Phase 2 Concept development and option selection for Briarhill suite of
projects and query if this has commenced;
Request to increase road safety measure and traffic management for cyclists entering from East
Galway to areas like Woodquay;
Has the Western region emergency team met;
Request for revised readable maps regarding the cycling infrastructure and proposals at Böthar
Stiofån and Clybaun Road and elaboration on any potential Compulsory Purchase Order Process.
Request for antiskid measures at Gleann na Coille estate on the Bearna Road;
Update on traffic system for Lough Atatia Road;
Problems with parking near schools and if Wardens could place warning letters on cars;
Request for priority to be given to the Tuam Road bus corridor with the imminent Crown Square
residential development; update on element of Tuam road bus corridor led by Galway County
Council;
Can staff be allocated to the Galway-Dublin greenway project and a request for an update on
the results for a route selection for the greenway;
Request for pedestrian prioritisation at roundabouts;
intent to extend the provision of public spaces to facilitate outdoor services with no assessment
of the noise impact on residents;
request for the enforcement heavy goods delivery times and reference to access being blocked
at Cross Street;
request for consideration of two way systems for cyclists on roads;
Cllr. J. Connolly proposed that the transportation section give a quarterly update report on
infrastructural projects under the Galway Transportation Strategy. This was seconded by Mayor C.
Connolly.
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services; Mr. J. Callan, A/Senior Engineer and Mr. McGrath, Chief
Executive responded to queries and clarifications raised.
Mayor C. Connolly proposed the consideration of a motion submitted by Cllr. E. Hoare and two
motions that she submitted. This was agreed.
3
The Chief Executive referred to Cllr. E. Hoare's motion and respectfully requested that in the first
instance that the Transportation unit examine the feasibility of the motion against relevant criteria.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe requested the locations proposed by Cllr. E. Hoare to be provided in advance of the
adjournment meeting.
Cllr. E. Hoare agreed to leave this motion on the agenda for consideration at the adjournment
meeting scheduled for Monday 27th September 2021.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
That Galway City Council immediately undertake to contact NUI, Galway with a view to trialling
a park and ride service for the Christmas period at Corrib Village.
This park and ride facility would serve thousands of residents of Galway City and would be
welcomed by both residents and business owners.
Mayor C. Connolly proceeded to read out the following two motions for consideration by Council.
Following discussion, Mayor C. Connolly amended her original motion calling for 'residents only'
parking in Galway city to be amended to nationwide.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
That Galway City Council write to the Minister for Transport, Eamon Ryan to introduce the
necessary legislation to permit and introduce 'residents' only parking nationwide.
This was approved unanimously.
Regarding Mayor. C. ConnollVs motion, as a point of information the Chief Executive advised that
school transport is provided by the Department of Education.
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
That Galway City Council write to the Minister for Transport to introduce a pilot scheme in
Galway City to provide a free school bus transport scheme for all city schools in consultation
with the Transport providers.
This was approved unanimously.
1. Quarterly Report, April - June 2021
ii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Housing — Not considered
Environment & Climate Change — Not considered
Recreation & Amenity — Not considered
Economic Development & Culture — Not considered
Community & Sports Development — Not considered
The meeting ended at 16:51pm.
4