Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
Held on Monday 20th November, 2017,
at 11.00 a.m. in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: C. Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M. Crowe, O.
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M.
Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J.
Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance,
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services,
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services,
Mr. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer.
Cllr.
B. Cameron
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery welcomed all to the Meeting.
Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to Item I(f) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM
01/17. He proposed that this Item be deferred to the December Ordinary Meeting as first
Item under Statutory Business. This was seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin and agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
"That Item I(f) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17 be deferred to the
December Ordinary Meeting as first Item under Statutory Business".
In Favour: 10 Against: 6 Abstain: O
Present: 16
The Motion was passed.
1. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
1 (a) Submission under Draft National Planning Framework
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath referred to the Draft National Planning Framework
Submission, which was discussed by the Corporate Policy Group. He confirmed that the
submission has been made to the Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government
with agreed adjustments. A discussion ensued around the importance of the Plan for
Galway City and Mr. McGrath confirmed that the National Planning Framework will be
formally made to the Minister and will inform the Capital Programme and priority project
funding.
1 (b) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th September 2017
1b (i) Environment
Mayor Flannery referred to the September 2017 Quarterly Report for Environment and
invited comments or clarification from Councillors.
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included:
The Environmental Education Awareness Programme; litter blackspots; request for number
of derelict sites both private and commercial and reference to legislation; illegal advertising
on the public Road; illegally parked caravans and overnight parking of advertising vehicles
along the walking area of the promenade seafront making the prom tatty and destroying
scenic amenity; Salthill, Sailin to Silverstrand costal protection scheme; Lock Gates project
Claddagh Basin; Lisloughrey pier upgrade; Galway City Waterways conditional assessment;
Anti-dumping initiative 2017 and clean ups; tyre regulations; Terryland River preliminary
Report and site investigation; advertisement of bulky goods service; removal of street litter
bin from Claddagh Basin; it was confirmed that following repair this bin will be replaced;
syringes policy; disposal of dog waste; request for the reduction of size of litter bins; bonfire
clean ups, racist graffiti; overgrowth of grass in the Terryland river; disposal of paint cans;
bring banks of the year award in Western Distributor Road, benefit of cameras at bring
banks to prevent illegal dumping; signage for access to Dog Pound; status of bathing waters
at Ballyloughane; request for permanent or pop up Civic amenity site in the Westside;
enforcement procedures regarding illegal dumping; Slow the Flow campaign; request for
recruitment of additional staff in the Litter Management Unit; Status of Fire Service
provision in the East side of the City; Fire Service working conditions and a request for
uniforms to be provided to Fire Staff that include the Galway City Council logo as a shared
service, status of Shared Services funding regarding Fire and Library services and request for
a Report, responsibility for Christmas Market Big Wheel and fire service attenders; WEEE
Scheme for waste electronic equipment and if this could be extended to paint products;
reference to Green Leaf project and enhancement of City Centre and a discussion regarding
location of buses at Merchant's Road.
A number of Councillors complimented the good work of Mr. D. Flood, A/Senior Executive
Engineer and the Environment team.
2
Mr. B. McGrath, Ms. E. Ruane and Mr. D. Flood provided comprehensive replies to
Councillors queries. Ms. Ruane gave an update on the Derelict Sites Register. She advised
that a policy for signage will be considered by the SPC in 2018. She confirmed that the City
Council is awaiting a foreshore licence for Sailin to Silverstrand Costal Protection Scheme
from the Department of Agriculture, Food & Marine. She clarified that funding for provision
of street bins is included in the 2018 Budget and will come before Council at the Statutory
Budget Meeting. She confirmed a Grafitti policy will be included for consideration in the
2018 SPC work programme. She added that a policy regarding syringe disposal will be
included in the Litter Management Plan.
Mr. D. Flood, A/ Senior Executive Engineer gave a detailed update on a number of
environmental queries including the Minor Flood Relief Scheme & Galway City Waterways,
Terryland River, Anti-Dumping Initiative, Civic Amenity Site, Liosbaun, Blue Flag at
Ballyloughane and Grattan Beaches, Claddagh Basin Lock Gates, air pollution, dog control
and waste tyres.
Mayor Flannery proceeded to read a Motion regarding byelaws to prohibit overnight
parking and took a Vote on same:
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"That Galway City Council calls on the Garda Superintendent of Salthill Garda Station to
rigorously police and enforce the bye-law prohibiting overnight parking along the
Promenade, Rockbarton Road, Grattan Park and the neighbouring areas that are subject
to the appropriate bye-law"
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed the submission of a Motion. The Mayor accepted same and
proceeded to read the Motion and a Vote was taken:
Proposed: Cllr. Frank Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. Donal Lyons
"That Galway City Council write to the Department of the Environment and request that
they prepare legislation re the disposal of paint similar to the WEE scheme where paint
would be brought back to the suppliers and disposed of by the paint companies.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed and it was requested to circulate same to all Councils Nationwide
by Cllrs Fahy and Lyons.
1b (ii) Recreation & Amenity
Mayor Flannery referred to the September 2017 Quarterly Report for Recreation & Amenity
and invited comments or clarification from Councillors.
3
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included: The
French Gardener project and suggestion by Members to create gardens to represent
twinned sister cities in Galway from Menlo Park to Seattle; update on Kingston & South Park
submissions, trees at Grattan Park; extension to Cappagh Park facility; request for details on
Ballyburke recreation & amenity lands; congratulations were extended to the Management
and Staff of Leisureland on achieving the White Flag for accessibility; Event licence for
Vodafone Comedy festival and enforcement of conditions including advertising, cost of fee,
bond and bar licence; healthy cities initiative; request for signage showing grave locations in
Bohermore and Rahoon cemeteries, update on new burial ground site and space in Rahoon
cemetery; Toft Park barrier for flood mitigation still in situ; Skate parks and surfacing;
infrastructural project at Corrib Park Phase 11 & Ill, planting and waterways; cessation of
Gateway project; CCTV at Westside; proposal by Bohemians Football Club regarding
Glenoaks All Weather Facility; enhancement of Merchant's Road, playgrounds policy and
request for lighting improvements; concern raised regarding alleged disposal of
syringes/needles in playgrounds; request for Community Centre Manager; change in
running track specification with reference to co-funding from GMIT; grass cutting and
machinery purchased and quality issues; Staffing levels for 2018; update on Sports Capital
update on Sports Capital Funding including Melody's field;
Project at Cappagh Park; ,
compliments to Tom Donoghue and team on grass cutting; tree topping; floral projects at
entrance to estates and reference to large ceramic pots; procurement and tendering
process; request for upgrade to goal mouth at Cappagh Park; discussion regarding the
potential for a crematorium in the City; access to St. James pitch.
Mayor Flannery proposed a Motion "That Galway City Council extend its sponsorship
scheme for Public Amenities to include Playgrounds for 2018 and advertise for expressions
of interest". The Motion was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and there was general
agreement on same.
Mr. T. Connell/Director of Services and Mr. S. Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent
gave a detailed response and update on a number of environmental queries.
At 1.25 p.m. Cllr. T. O' Flaherty requested an extension of time so that the Recreation
& Amenity Quarterly Report agenda item be dealt with. This was seconded by Cllr. D.
Lyons and agreed.
The Meeting rose at 1.50 p.m. for lunch and returned to resume the Meeting at 2.30 p.m.
(iii) Transportation
Mayor Flannery referred to the September 2017 Quarterly Report for Transportation and
invited comments or clarification from Councillors.
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included: Request
for list of resurfacing completed works; Coca Cola Bike Scheme new stations; Galway City
Ring Road and date of submission to An Bord Pleanåla; integration of lighting at Fr. Griffin
Road and the Promenade; Bearna Greenway plans; pedestrian facilities; slow zones; Sunday
4
parking; rock armour/flood defences; Rosary Lane footpath; speed limits; Siobhån McKenna
traffic calming; Browne Roundabout pedestrian crossing; bus shelters; bus stop at Clybaun
Road; Tuam Road bus corridor; right turn at Böthar na Mine; Parkmore works; parking pay
by text; Greenway Roscam to Oranmore; Kirwan Roundabout; Park & Ride; Glenina road
markings; City Centre Transport Management Plan; Public Lighting upgrades; Signage for
National University of Ireland Galway and Galway Mayo Institute of Technoloy, block gullies.
Mr. U. Finn Senior Engineer gave a detailed responses and updates on a number of
Transportation queries.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested to submit two Motions regarding pedestrian crossings which
were seconded by Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir. The Mayor agreed and proceeded to read out same
and a Vote was taken:
Proposed: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Seconded: Cllr. Cathal Ö Conchüir
"That Galway City Council replaces the two courtesy pedestrian crossings with a full
pedestrian crossing at Maunsells Road & Monroes Tavern, Domnick Street."
In Favour: 3 Against: 7 Abstain: 2 Present: 12
The Motion was defeated.
Proposed: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Seconded: Cllr. Cathal Ö Conchüir
"That Galway City Council prioritises the implementation of pedestrian crossings
throughout the city in consultation with Councillors in the Works Programme 2018"
In Favour: 3 Against: 8 Abstain: 1 Present: 12
The Motion was defeated.
Notice of Motions submitted at the meeting:
Proposed by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Seconded by: Cllr. Ollie Crowe
That Galway City Council install signage in Council Cemeteries to provide a plot map with a
numbering system that will refer to a register of all those buried therein.
Mayor Flannery read out the Motion and there was general agreement on this Motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. Mike Cubbard
Seconded by: Cllr. Noel Larkin
I propose that this Council explore the possibility of creating employment to maintain the
Westside Playing Pitches as was done in the past and most recently through an Employment
Activation Scheme.
5
Proposed by: Cllr. Peter Keane
Seconded by: Cllr. Ollie Crowe
In relation to Kingston & Southpark Masterplans, that the Council would consider the
Manager's report and recommendations set out therein at the December meeting of
Galway City Council, with a view to progressing the Part VIII Planning Application in Quarter
1 2018
Proposed by: Cllr. Pearce Flannery
Seconded by: Cllr. Donal Lyons
That Galway City Council calls on the Garda Superintendent of Salthill Garda Station to
rigorously police and enforce the bye-law prohibiting overnight parking along the
Promenade, Rockbarton Road Grattan Park and the neighbouring areas that are subject to
the appropriate bye-law.
(iv) Housing
Not Considered.
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development.
Not considered.
(c) Chief Executive's Report for September 2017
Not considered.
(d) Chief Executive's Report for October 2017
Not considered.
(e) Chief Executive's Report for November 2017
Not considered.
(f) To discuss a report on Notice of Motion NOM 01/17
Deferred to December Ordinary Meeting.
(g) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements
in Galway
Not considered.
(h) BREXIT
(i) Impacts / preparation / planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities
emerging from Brexit
(iii) The view from Irish Local Government
Items h (i), (ii) & (iii) Deferred
6
2. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
Not considered.
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities
Not considered.
NOM 01/ 17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr D. McDonnell
3rd January 2017
"l hereby propose that a variation of the City Development Plan is initiated forthwith to
provide for the re-zoning of lands of 1.2 acres at Greenfields, Newcastle, in the ownership of
Rory Rogers c/o McCarthy Keville O'Sullivan, block 1, Financial Services Building,
Moneenagheisha Road, Galway. The proposed variation is in the interest of proper planning
and sustainable development and having regard to the housing crisis that currently exists in
Galway City."
Not considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open.
We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not considered.
7
NOM 3/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. J. Walsh
25th January, 2017
"l am calling on Galway City Council to expedite the preparation of the Draft Local Area Plan
for Ardaun. These lands have been identified as one of the major urban housing delivery
sites with a potential yield of 500 units in the medium term subject to progress on the Local
Area Plan".
Not considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible".
Not considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil no ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur
chun cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not considered.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
Not considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural
Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not considered.
8
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
Not considered.
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the
full Council for consideration
Not considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing
a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free
to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches.
This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which
belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State
investment from taxpayer money".
Not considered.
NOM 20/17 Notice given by:
Cllr. M. Lohan
20th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"The heritage of our city is unique and diverse with both urban, rural and waterfront beauty
within our borders. Coolough Village, above the banks of the Corrib, is a bucolic oasis within
Galway City. The old roads, boreens and pathways are now a nature wonderland and an
idyllic and vital historical reminder of our past. Galway City Council commends the area
residents for their combined work in maintaining and cleaning the boreens. The use of this
rustic jewel in Heritage Week walks and their continued use by residents enhances the life
9
of our city. It is essential that the boreens are protected and cared for so that future
generations can continue to use and enjoy this unique amenity. This City Council supports
the residents as they work with Heritage Ireland and other agencies to preserve, protect and
enhance Coolough and its environs."
Not considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
Date Received:
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not considered.
NOM 23/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
10th April, 2017
That Galway City Council meeting includes in the Galway Transportation Strategy Light Rail
as a possible solution to the traffic chaos in Galway city.
Not considered.
3. QUESTIONS
QI/17
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
February, 2017.
Can I please have an update on the water Safety Audit for Galway City that was requested
over 12 months ago. When will it be published, distributed. What are the plans for it. Who
is the point of contact that will be working to deliver safety works. What is/has been the
delay in getting the audit done. Who is in charge of audit in City Hall.
This has been a very sad year again for the amount of persons who have entered the water
across the city, I have been working with a number of groups who are trying to put in place
a system to recover victims quicker. The next step is prevention.
Not considered.
10
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway. Further reply to
issue.
Email from C. O'Connor, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 4th August 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and
County Council
Letter from Mr. Brendan Holland on behalf of Galway City Business Association and
Eyre Square All Ireland Screen Committee
Letter from M. Cleary, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Offaly County
Council dated 19th September 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Offaly County Council
Letter circulated October 2017
Letter from T. O'Callaghan, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City
& County Council dated 5th October 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City &
County Council — Letter attached.
Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 6th November 2017 Re: Rugby World Cup 2023 —
Ireland Bid - Copy attached.
Items 4 (a) to (i) were not considered.
The meeting ended at 3.30 p.m.
i es, Con r
Signed
Mayor of Galway
11
