Presiding
Mi es, C Signed
Mayr M Gal*"
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held virtually on zoom platform and in the Connacht Hotel
on Mopday 22nd May, 2023 at 3.00pm
Cllr. C. Higgins, Mayor of the City of Galway
Present (Councillors) Councillors: A. Cheevers, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, A.
Present Virtually
Council Officials
Curran, E. Hoare, P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell &
N. McNelis
Councillors: l. Byrne, C. Connolly, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy,
N. Larkin, N. Murphy, M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
P. Philbin, Director of Services
P. Greene, Director of Services
H. Kilroy, A/Director of Services/ Head of Finance
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
Mr.
U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Engineer
MS.
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
MS.
A. Kenny, Administrative Officer
Ms.
S. King, Assistant Staff Officer
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator, commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders
followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor C. Higgins welcomed all to the meeting and proposed a minute's silence as a
demonstration of sympathy in memory of Ann Walsh, RIP, mother of former
Councillor and former Teachta Dåla Brian Walsh. This was seconded by Cllr. E.
Hoare and agreed. A minute's silence ensued. She suggested that the agenda be
considered as set out. This was agreed.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that NOM 11/2022 be considered by Council. He
acknowledged that he had received a response to same. This was agreed.
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed that the meeting conclude at 18:00. This was seconded by
Mayor. C. Higgins agreed by Council.
1. Notice of Motions
Mayor C. Higgins referred Council to NOM 8/2022. Cllr. A. Cheevers requested that
the Motions 18/2021 and NOM 8/2022 he submitted be considered at a later stage.
This was agreed.
NOM 812022
Submitted b Cllr. A. Cheevers on the 16th Ma 2022
I am calling on Galway County Council to have full consultation with Galway City
Council public representatives in relation to the Master Plan for the Galway Airport
Site.
I believe that as it is jointly owned with the county council the city council need to
have full consultation in this rocess and it should not be solel for Count Council.
NOM 18/2021 submitted under SO 34 at Council meeting held on 12th April 2021
Notice given by: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: A ril 2021 Amended wordin 30th Ma 2022
That Galway City Council to permanently pedestrianise cross street and that would
be from the Dåil Bar to Supermacs and to work with businesses to ensure the safety
for pedestrians and cyclists.
Reply issued on 16th April 2021. Request to leave on the Agenda. The Motion was
deferred at a Special meeting held on 30th May 2022 and a Report is to be brought
to Council on the matter.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 13/2022. Cllr. N McNelis spoke on the
motion.
NOM 13/2022
Notice given by: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded By: Cllr. D. Lyons
Date received: 7th June 2022
That Galway City Council will call on the Ministers for Justice; Education; and
Children, Disability, Equality & Integration to immediately implement an operation
Encompass-style programme between An Garda Siochåna and schools.
Operation Encompass is a police-led, school-based early intervention
safeguarding scheme which supports children and young people who experience
Domestic Abuse. Operation Encompass was created to ensure that by the start of
the next school day, a child's school will be informed that there has been a police-
attended incident of domestic abuse at the home of the child. The child is then
supported immediately upon arrival at school.
In 2020, Women's Aid (Ireland) reported that there were 30,841 disclosures of
Abuse including 5,948 were against children. We need to support these children
now. www.operationencompass.org
Abstain: O
In Favour: 16
Against: O
This Motion is carried.
Present: 16
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 14/2022. Cllr. N Murphy spoke on the
motion.
NOM 14/2022
Seconded By: Cllr. A. Curran
Notice Given by: Cllr. N. Murphy
25th June 2022
Date received:
That Galway City Council will write to the Advertising Standards Authority for
Ireland to complain that the short-term letting platform Airbnb is carrying
advertisements for properties within the Galway Rent Pressure Zone which are in
breach of planning regulations.
Councillors discussed the Motion.
2
Cllr. N. McNelis proposed to omit the word 'airbnb' and change to short-term letting
platforms so as not to single out one company. Cllr. D Lyons suggested putting the
word "some" before the word property.
Cllr. N Murphy agreed to amend this motion to include the word "some" in front of
properties.
Cllr. E Hoare put down an amendment to add the wording "short-term letting
platforms" and "some" in front of the word properties as suggested by Cllr. D. Lyons.
This was seconded by Cllr. J Connolly.
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment is considered first. Ms. A. Rohan,
Meetings Administrator proceeded to record a vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded By: Cllr. J. Connolly
That Galway City Council will write to the Advertising Standards Authority for
Ireland to complain that short-term letting platforms are carrying advertisements for
some properties within the Galway Rent Pressure Zone which are in breach of
planning regulations.
In Favour: 13
Against: 3
This Amendment Motion is carried.
Abstain: O
Present: 16
As the Amendment is carried, it now becomes the substantive Motion. Ms. A. Rohan,
Meetings Administrator proceeded to record a vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare
Seconded By: Cllr. J. Connolly
That Galway City Council will write to the Advertising Standards Authority for
Ireland to complain that short-term letting platforms are carrying advertisements for
some properties within the Galway Rent Pressure Zone which are in breach of
planning regulations.
In Favour: 15
Against: 1
This Motion is carried.
Abstain: O
Present: 16
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 20/2022. Cllr. A. Cheevers requested
that the removal of this Motion as he had received a response on same.
NOM 2012022
Notice Given By: Cllr. A. Cheevers
Date Received: 29th Nov 2022
That this Council is concerned in relation to the operation of the transport division
of the City Council and calls on the CEO to carry out an urgent review of its
operations and to report back to the next Council meeting with proposals to
improve the delivery of transport projects of all types in the City and to improve
consultation with the elected members and ublic alike.
The Motion was removed by Cllr. A. Cheevers
3
Mayor C Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 01/2023. Cllr. E. Hoare spoke on the
Motion.
NOMi172Ö23
Notice Given by: Cllr. E. Hoare
1 oth January 2023
Date received:
Seconded By: Cllr. J. Connolly
that Galway City Councüf review and urgently address the flooding issues that
continue to persist at the playing pitches in South Park. This is a serious health and
safety issue and is impacting on the uses of the playing pitches during periods of
heavy rainfall.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
This Motion is carried.
Councillors discussed this motion.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services responded that this is not straight fomard site
from drainage point of view. It was previously an old landfill and needs to be
managed carefully. He agreed to looking at the possibility of reconfiguring the pitch
and that the proposal needs further investigation.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive added that an environmental assessment may need
to be conducted along with liaison with the Environment Protection Agency.
Cllr. D. McDonnell requested a Report to be done to investigate the area and come
back at the June meeting with findings and reasons why it cannot be done.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive responded that it is not a simple solution, and the
Executive will revert regarding same in due course.
Cllr. E Hoare requested that Motion 01/2023 remain on the agenda.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 11/2022 which Cllr. D Lyons had
resubmitted on ISt May. A response to the motion was issued and Cllr. Lyons
requested that it be considered in line with Standing Orders. Cllr. D. Lyons spoke on
the motion.
NOM 11/2022
Notice Given By: Cllr. D Lyons Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
30th May 2022/Resubmitted May 2023
Date received:
I request Galway City Counci to enter immediate discussions with relevant land
owners on the Upper Ballymoneen Road so as to acquire sufficient lands by
negotiation or by Compulsory Purchase Order so that a bus turning bay can be
installed which will permit a bus service operation on the Upper Ballymoneen Road
serving the following estates; Sli Burca, Leitir Burca, Leas na Mara, Drisin,
Maoilin, Sli Gheal, Fana Bui, Radharc na Farraige, Magh Burca, Ard Cre and a
number of other estates now in construction and further developments due to take
lace on Ball moneen Road in the future.
4
Councillors discussed the Motion and queried if Galway City Council made
submissions regarding revised routes proposed and have the National Transport
Authority (NTA) come back with any response.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services advised that the City Council had input
engagement and agreed that a turning point is needed at Ballymoneen and added
that a whole infrastructural piece needs to be looked at but that we need to allow the
bus route review to happen first.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive added that the review of the bus network is part of
the overall Bus Connects and a Compulsory Purchase (CPO) cannot be pre-judged
and all options must be looked at and pursued before consideration of a CPO.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed removing the wording "CPO" from the motion and to add "all
options to be looked at." This was seconded by Cllr. N McNelis.
NOM 11/2022
Notice Given By: Cllr. D Lyons Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
30th Ma 2022/Resubmitted Ma 2023 - Amended
Date received:
I request Galway City Council to enter immediate discussions with relevant land
owners on the Upper Ballymoneen Road and consider all options so that a bus
turning bay can be installed which will permit a bus service operation on the Upper
Ballymoneen Road serving the following estates; Sli Burca, Leitir Burca, Leas na
Mara, Drisin, Maoilin, Sli Gheal, Fana Bui, Radharc na Farraige, Maigh Burca, Ard
Cre and a number of other estates now in construction and further developments
due to take place on Ballymoneen Road in the future.
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
This motion is carried.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 19/2022. Cllr. D Lyons spoke on the
motion
NOM 19/2022
Notice Given By: Cllr. D Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
7th October 2022
Date received:
I request Galway City Council to immediately begin the process of the Taking-ln-
Charge of the laneway linking Ballymoneen Road to the Rosard estate which is
adjacent to the grounds of St. John the Apostle Church and the Monalee Heights
estate.
In Favour: 17
Against: O
This motion is carried.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
Cllr. N McNelis requested a report on all roads taken in charge and outstanding
across the city.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services agreed to have this report for the July Ordinary
meeting.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 06/2023. Cllr. A Curran spoke on this
motion.
5
NOM 06/2023
Notice Given By: Cllr. A Curran
10th April 2023
Date received:
Seconded By: Cllr. N McNelis
That Galway City Council in collaboration with Galway County Council would as a
matter of public safety, reallocate space from the hard shoulder and carriageway
width on the R338 Oranmore Coast Road, from the junction of the old Dublin Road
to the end of the city border on the R338, in order to provide safe walking and
cycling space. That the Council would achieve this by carrying out the following
actions:
clearing the existing hard shoulders of weeds, shrubs, overhanging
branches, and other vegetation, mud and any matter organic and inorganic,
in order to maximise the space available,
removing all construction debris, rubbish, and other impediments to safe
use,
filling in all potholes and resurfacing the hard shoulders so that they are
smooth and level, and safe for pedestrians, wheelchair users, buggies and
bicycles,
creating segregation between the road carriageway and the walking/cycling
space by the use of bollards.
This action is to be recognised as the first of several steps in the creation of proper
Active Travel routes i.e., footpaths and bike lanes, for those living, working, or
attending school in the area.
The Motion was removed from the agenda by Cllr. A Curran
A discussion took place on the motion and the following queries/points were raised:
• Is there funding available for this.
The new Athlone/Galway Greenway may have a bearing on this — clarification
requested on this.
Can flexi bollards be installed as part of an interim solution.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed that the first three bullet points of the motion be
actioned by the Roads department staff.
Cllr. P. Keane is in favour of the spirit of the sentiment of the motion but subject to a
detailed design brought forward to elected members. He requested that this caveat
be put in.
Cllr. A. Cheevers requested a proper plan for the proposal and to add to the motion
"to seek funding for lighting."
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services responded that he has no objection to the
sentiment of the motion and that funding is generally not an issue, but resources
may be. To assign a resource to this will delay other cycling projects. He asked if
Elected Members want this "with immediate effect" and no public consultation, or do
they want a design to come back to the meeting for consideration. He said that road
maintenance issues can be done. He added that an early appraisal on this road can
6
be completed that will include stakeholder engagement with Galway County Council,
the Galway to Athlone Cycleway Project Office and the National Transport Authority
and a report will be provided to members.
Cllr. Curran agreed to remove "with immediate effect" from the motion and remove
"and planters." He would like to see it looked at timely and requested that Galway
City Council look at it in collaboration with Galway County Council.
There was no vote on this motion. Cllr. A Curran is satisfied with the
executive's commitment and agreed to remove this motion from the agenda.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 12/2023. Cllr. C. Connolly spoke on
the motion. Cllr. C. Connolly called for a Roll Call Vote; this was supported by Cllr. N.
McNelis and Cllr. A. Curran.
NOM 12/2023
Notice Given By: Cllr. C. Connolly
24th April 2023
Date received:
Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
That GCC condemns the recent Govemment decision to remove the ban on
evictions and further calls for a reinstatement of the Eviction Ban as pertained
previously.
In Favour: Cllrs. A. Cheevers; C. Connolly, M. Cubbard, A. Curran & N. McNelis
Against: Cllrs. l. Byrne; J. Connolly; M.J. Crowe; C. Higgins; E. Hoare; P. Keane;
D. Lyons; D. McDonnell & T. O'Flaherty
Abstain: Cllrs. N. Murphy & M. O'Connor
In Favour: 5 Against: 9
Abstain: 2
The motion failed.
Present: 16
There was a 10-minute break at 16.38. The meeting resumed at 16.58.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 13/2023. Cllr. C Connolly spoke on
the motion. Cllr. C. Connolly requested a Roll Call Vote; however this did not have
the required two Councillors to support same in advance of the recording of the vote.
NOM 13/2023
Notice Given By: Cllr. C Connolly
Seconded By: Cllr. N McNelis
24th April 2023
Date received:
That GCC demands that in view of Govemment plans to remove Development
Levies, which currently provide for essential infrastructure, that an equivalent
funding allocation will be provided to this Local Authority.
In Favour: 5 Against: 9 Abstain: O Absent: 4 Present: 14
This motion failed.
Councillors discussed the motion and asked if the Chief Executive had received any
confirmation from the Department in relation to funding for development levies.
7
Mr. B. McGrath responded that nothing has been confirmed to the County and City
Management Association and he will seek an update at the next meeting.
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 14/2023. Cllr. A Cheevers spoke on
the motion and requested a Roll Call Vote.
NOM 14/2023
Notice Given By: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded By: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date received: 8thY@Y 2023
In light of the World Health Organisation downgrading the COVID-19 pandemic
and declaring it is no longer a global emergency. I propose that effective from June
16, 2023, the AGM, all meeting s of Galway City Council, including Strategic Policy
Committees, Joint Policing Committee and other associated meetings of the
Council retum to the Council Chamber in City Hall with a Hybrid option to remain in
lace for elected members, staff and media to avail of should the wish to do so.
Councillors discussed the motion.
Mr. P. Greene, Director of Services agreed to circulate the Report commissioned on
the Council Chamber system and standards to be met.
Mayor. C. Higgins proposed an amendment.
In line with Standing Orders the amendment is considered first. Ms. A. Rohan,
Meetings Administrator proceeded to record a vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins
Seconded By. Cllr. E. Hoare
That an extemal Heaith & Safety report is procured and circulated to Councillors
before the July Ordinary meeting.
In Favour: 11 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 17
This Motion is carried.
As the Amendment is carried, it now becomes the substantive Motion. Ms. A. Rohan,
Meetings Administrator proceeded to record a vote:
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Higgins Seconded By: Cllr. E. Hoare
That an external Health & Safety report is procured and circulated to Councillors
before the July Ordinary meeting.
Against: 2
In Favour: 15
This Motion is carried.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to NOM 15/2023. Cllr. C. Higgins proposed
suspending standing orders to deal with this motion. This was seconded by Cllr. E.
Hoare and agreed. Cllr. D. Lyons spoke on this motion.
8
Cllr. M. Cubbard expressed his dissatisfaction with the proposed motion and
requested a Roll Call Vote on the matter, this did not have the required support of
two other Councillors.
NOM 15/2023
Notice Given By: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded By: Cllr. C. Higgins
24th April 2023
Date received:
That the two housing developments planned for Ballyburke and Clybaun Road
Lower would be 80% affordable housing and 20% social housing.
In Favour: 6 Against: 11 Abstain: O Absent: O Present: 17
This motion was defeated.
Councillors discussed the motion.
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services responded that in relation to Clybaun Road, there
are 28 social units approved by the Department and there has been no increase in
the proposed no of social units since designs for the project commenced. The total
build is 57 units. In relation to Ballyburke, the proposal is for 84 units, and it has been
highlighted to the Department for an appropriate mix of housing. In relation to
Ballybane, there was no affordable housing funding available at the time, only
funding for social housing. She referred to changes in the Part 8 process which will
be applicable to Clybaun and any social or affordable development which will
commence by 31 st December 2024.
Cllr. N. McNelis asked if the executive would meet with members to go over the
design as this might help to cut out any issues going forward.
The Chief Executive responded that the Section 179 process was introduced by the
Government to try and speed up the delivery of homes. The executive will approach
this like a part 8 up to the public consultation phase. He added that the Executive will
meet with the elected members for the area regarding the design and layout and
listen to concerns but cannot change Section 179. The Chief Executive gave a
commitment that Councillors would be advised of the process as if it was a Part 8
application. However, there will be no public consultation or a formal Part 8 process.
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that the Motion be put to the floor. Mayor C. Higgins called
for a show of hands in favour of this motion. This motion was defeated.
Elected members thanked Brendan McGrath, Chief Executive for his work over the
last ten years and wished him well in his retirement.
This concluded the business of the meeting. The meeting ended at 19:06.
9
