Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 23rd April, 2018 at 4.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, P. Conneely, O. Crowe, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer,
Mr. T. Prendergast, A/Senior Engineer,
Mr. M. O' Donnell, Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
& Cllr. C. Connolly.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mayor Flannery proposed the Recreation & Amenity Quarterly Report be taken first followed
by Transportation. This was agreed.
1. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Quarterly Reports for quarter ending 30th March 2018
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
A number of Councillors expressed their dissatisfaction regarding the granting of a licence to
use public and open space at the Spanish Arch for the promotion of alcohol. Councillors raised
items including welcoming new exercise equipment at Toft Park & replacement of equipment
at McGrath's Field Public Park; query if any plans for new playgrounds or furniture
replacements; request to extend Cappagh Park to provide car parking facilities; request for
update on Blackrock diving tower plans.
A discussion was held regarding the standard of grass cutting in the City. A timeline for works
at Westside Boxing Club was requested and issues regarding parking at Corrib Park were
raised with a request that any future licence issued should include a clause regarding parking;
1
request for enhancement of Bohermore and Eyre Square areas; request for a new Cemetery
in the Eastside of the City and a timeline for a Part 8 to come before Council; reference to
IBAL and graffiti at Millennium Park; reference to mixed messages from the community
regarding the South Park Plan and the multi-use green area in the Kingston Plan; request for
action regarding stray horses in recreation lands particularly in the Eastside of the City;
request for Ballinfoile and Cappagh Road Centres to have fully operational opening hours;
request for landscape and pathway works at Merlin Woods; request for clarification and a
copy of correspondence sent in January 2018 regarding construction of a new boundary on
the School Road in Doughiska; query as to when bollards will be installed at Doughiska;
request for update regarding Cluain Mhuire running track and licence agreement with GMIT;
request for timeframe for City Centre/Shop Street works; request for consideration of a
hockey pitch at Kingston; Millars Lane; clarification to confirm two playground projects in the
vicinity of Lakeshore playground; €10,000 for additional equipment and €20,000 to the capital
playground fund.
Mr. T. Connell and Mr. U. Finn gave detailed replies to queries and clarifications raised by
Councillors.
A discussion was held regarding a proposal by Cllr. P. Conneely 'That public places/parks in
the control of Galway City Council be not used for the promotion of alcohol'. This was
seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe. Cllr. C. Connolly also submitted a Motion That Galway City
Council would in future prohibit the direct promotion of alcohol related events on all public
spaces'. This was seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery. It was agreed to defer both Motions for a
future Council meeting, if appropriate.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
'With regard to allotments - that Galway City Council implement the policy which would
ensure that long term unused allotments be taken back to our control and then re-
allocated'.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Council rise at 18.00pm once the Housing Quarterly Report
is dealt with for a 30 minute break and resume at 18.30pm. This was agreed.
(iv) Housing
Councillors paid compliments to Housing staff for great work completed in the last year.
Councillors raised queries and matters of clarification on the Housing & Social Inclusion
quarterly report including: query on policy regarding the sale of Council houses; mortgage
scheme; request for timeline on development of Capital Advance Leasing Facility (CALF) units
in Renmore; Housing Needs Assessment; vacant housing units; 1,100 social units by 2021
welcomed; housing transfer waiting list; delivery of Part V units; anti-social behavior; Housing
Assistance Payments; homelessness; request for update on proposed women's refuge on the
Magdalene laundry site on College Road; Choice based letting and the extension of the Cold
weather initiative was welcomed.
2
A discussion was held regarding four proposed infill housing schemes which are proposed to
deliver 23 units of housing. Some Councillors expressed reservations advocating that green
areas should be protected.
At 18:00pm, Mayor Flannery proposed that the Council rise to have a break after the Housing
Quarterly Report is finished. This was agreed.
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO Housing responded to queries and clarifications raised in detail.
Cllr. M. Lohan requested Notice of Motion 2/18 regarding housing on the agenda to be
considered. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell. Following discussion and an impending
affordable scheme to be announced by Government, Cllr. M. Lohan advised he would hold
NOM 2/18 on the agenda for consideration at a future Council meeting
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes".
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
'To note Quarterly Reports for Environment, Transportation & Community, Culture &
Economic Development.
In Favour: 10 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 11
The Motion was passed.
(i) Environment;
Noted
(iii) Transportation;
Noted
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development.
Noted
Mayor Flannery recommended the suspending of standing orders and proposed at 18.45pm,
that the Council rise for a break. The Meeting resumed at 19.15pm.
3
Mayor Flannery proposed the consideration of Report of Officials under Item 3 (h),(e),(d),(f)
& (g). This was agreed.
3(h) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway;
3(e) Update Report on the Dyke Road Site / Cultural Infrastructure Provision
3(d) Report on Christmas Market 2017
3(f) Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014 - 2016
3. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
3(h) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway
Councillors raised a number of queries regarding the impending second interim report of
the expert advisory group on local government arrangements in Galway. Councillors voiced
their concerns and opposition to any proposals for a 'Greater Galway Authority'.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath outlined the initial main findings of the first Interim
Report that issued in June 2017:
1. That the establishment of a Greater Galway Authority is both technically and
administratively feasible.
2. The recommendation for the appointment of a dedicated head of economic and physical
development operating at the highest strategic level, to engage at national and international
levels, and to ensure Galway remains an economic driver for regional development.
3. The endorsement for the creation of a strong, single economic development unit
4. That a Greater Galway Authority, with an integrated Urban and Rural Vision, has the
potential to become the main driver of Regional Development in the West of Ireland and can
by working alongside the Regional Authority become a vital part of the transformational
arrangements needed to create a step change in such a development.
Mr. B. McGrath advised that the Expert Group had met 15 times approximately and that the
Second Interim Report was being finalised for submission to the Minister of State for Local
Government and Electoral Reform.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
'That an urgent meeting be arranged with Minister John Paul Phelan, as expeditiously as
possible to consider any proposed amalgamation.
This was agreed.
3(e) Update Report on the Dyke Road Site / Cultural Infrastructure Provision
Mr. M. O' Donnell, SEO presented to the Meeting. He gave the background and policy for
consideration of the development of new cultural infrastructure, as well as the overall
development of the Dyke Road site. He outlined the broad policy objective of Galway City
4
Council. Mr. O' Donnell referred to the Dyke Road which currently accommodates the Black
Box as a site of strategic importance, given its location and scale. He confirmed that a review
of the provision of new cultural infrastructure in the City has recently been undertaken which
resulted in the following five key recommendations:
1. That a Cultural Infrastructure Delivery Programme (CIDP) be formally constituted, with
adequate funding & resources, to drive the delivery of capital cultural projects for the City, and
ensure that the physical infrastructure is in place to complement and enable the legacy from
ECOC 2020.
2. A scoping exercise be carried out to provide a more detailed building specification e.g.
auditorium requirements, visual arts space, other uses & requirements, with associated
costings.
3. Carry out a Site Selection Study of City sites in public and private ownership and an
independent evaluation of potentially viable options for the location of a new cultural building.
4. Prepare a detailed Site Analysis & Procurement Report: A report examining site
characteristics and constraints, including Planning & Environmental, flood risk, transport,
archaeological, capacity, commercial value and financial yield, and possible procurement
options. Whatever development/procurement option emerges as the preferred one, the detail
set out in this report will be required.
5. It is proposed that a formal Pre-Procurement Market Consultation Process should also be
conducted. This would involve facilitating meetings with interested parties, depending on the
preferred delivery model, presenting the findings from the procurement report, and collating
soundings and inputs in advance of any formal procurement/bidding process.
A lengthy discussion was held regarding the Update Report on the Dyke Road/Cultural
Infrastructure.
Mr. M. O' Donnell and the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath responded to queries and clarifications
raised by Councillors.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
'Approval of the Report on the Dyke Road Site/CuItural Infrastructure Provision including
Recommendations no. 1 to 5 subject to resources'
In Favour: 11 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 11
The motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
'That Ordinary and Special Council meetings commence at 2pm until and including July
Council meetings excluding the Annual Mayoral election meeting.
In Favour: 8 Against: 3 Abstain: O Present: 11
The Chief Executive advised the Meeting that he would be unable to attend the May Ordinary
Council Meeting.
5
Mayor Flannery reminded the Meeting that the Mayoral Ball is scheduled for Friday 11th May
2018 in the Galway Bay Hotel at 7pm with tickets available from Ms. Mary Bennett in the
Treasure Chest, Shop Street.
2. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
24th August, 2016.
Date Received:
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We
call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil né ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun
cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
6
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland
and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the full
Council for consideration.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a
Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to
air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This
should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs
7
to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment
from taxpayer money".
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Slf Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes".
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement
of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr.
Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of
Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
The Meeting concluded at 20.45pm
nutes, n
ed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
8