Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Monday
23rd  June 2014 at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Present:
Councillors: B. Cameron; Cathal Ó Conchúir; Catherine Connolly;
M.J. Crowe; O. Crowe; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; M. Farrell; P. 
Flannery; P. Keane; N. Larkin; D. Lyons; A. Marley; D. 
McDonnell; N. McNelis; .
In Attendance:            Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
 Mr. J. O’Neill, Director of Services,
  
 Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, 
                            Ms Edel McCormack, Head of Finance
 
 
 Mr. W.M. Dunne, A/Director of Services,
 Mr. Patrick Foley,  Meetings Administrator,
  Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Absent:
Cllr. John Walsh
1.    
To consider the content of a submission to the Joint Oireachtas 
Committee  on  Transport  and  Communications  on  the  Draft  
General Scheme of the Harbours (Amendment) Bill,2014". 
Director of Services, Joe O'Neill gave a summary on the Harbours (Amendment)
Bill,2014 – Draft General Scheme.
(Documentation had previously been circulated to Councillors).
Mr. O' Neill in his report, highlighted the purpose of the Bill in providing a statutory
basis to influence measures in the National Ports Policy.  He also outlined the
different categories of Ports (Tiers).  Galway falls into Tier 3 (Regional Ports).The
National Ports Policy recommended that the control of Galway Port is transferred
from Galway Harbour Company to Galway City Council.  City Council was invited to
make  a  submission  to  the  Joint  Oireachtas  Committee  on  Transport  and
Communications on the General Scheme of the Bill by Friday 27th June.
The following issues were raised at the meeting:
•
Short time-frame that the City Council was given to make a submission on the 
Bill.
•
Clarification needed on a number of items including:
1

Ownership of the Port & what that entailed.
Future roles of Board & Minister 
Future liabilities for Galway City Council & the need for indemnification 
from same
Corporate Governance of the Port Company
•
If the Port was still fit for purpose with 60% of its income derived from non-
core business.
•
Also represented a huge opportunity both Economically and Socially.
The following motion was proposed by Cllr. M. J. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. P Keane and
unanimously agreed. 
“That the necessary due diligence be carried out by a reputable firm on the
Harbour Company and that report be brought before Council in due course
and the relevant Government Department pay these cost”
 The Chief Executive acknowledged the concerns of the Councillors but also expressed
the opportunities that may result if the Council take ownership of the Port. He advised
that, in is view any transferred shareholding in the Port should be vested in the elected
Council.  He stated that he would voice their concerns, and seek clarification on the
issues  raised  by  the  members,  in  making  the  submission  to  the  Joint  Oireachtas
Committee. It was  agreed that  the  submission would be  circulated to all  Council
members.
The meeting then concluded.
2

3
