Minutes of Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Friday
23rd June 2017, at 6.00 p.m. in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Present:
Councillors:
Cllr. N. Larkin, Mayor of the City of Galway
B. Cameron, C. O' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly,
M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell,
P. Flannery, P. Keane, D. Lyons, M. Lohan, D. McDonnell,
N. McNelis, T. 0' Flaherty, J. Walsh.
In Attendance: Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance/Director of Services
Ms. E. Ruane, A/Director of Services
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
Ms. J. Georges, Clerical Officer
Ms. O. Lawless, Clerical Officer
Mayor Larkin suggested the suspension of standing orders to permit photography in
the Chamber during the meeting. This was agreed and was proposed by Cllr. P
Conneely and seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard.
Mayor Larkin welcomed the Councillors, the media and the public gathered in the foyer
to the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council. He said that his term as Mayor was an
exciting and wonderful year for him and for Galway City also. He referred back to his
first week in office in June 2016, when he travelled to Aarhaus in Denmark to represent
the City in the bid to be European Region of Gastronomy. This bid was successful and
Galway will be celebrating the year of Gastronomy in 2018. The Mayor informed the
meeting that from there, he travelled to Ljubljana in Slovenia where the City Council
was also successful in winning outright the European Green Leaf Award. The Mayor,
the Chief Executive and staff of the City Council gave a presentation to the adjudicators
highlighting the level of commitment and ambitions that Galway City has for the
environment.
The Mayor congratulated the Chief Executive and the bid team on the success of the
2020 European Capital of Culture accolade, which was awarded to the City and County.
'Making Waves' is the theme of the bid. He complimented the level of commitment
from our businesses and the general public referring also to the thousands of people
lining the route as the judges left the City.
The Mayor referred to the privilege of promoting Galway City at the Milwaukee festival.
In his visit to Seattle, the Mayor had the honour of being a keynote speaker at a
7.30a.m. breakfast meeting to over 150 business people from the region showcasing
Galway as an area to do business. He referred to his delight following numerous
meetings that the 2017 - 2023 Galway City Development Plan came in to effect in
January 2017. He referred to other developments including the Galway City ring road
which is due to go to An Bord Pleanåla in September 2017 and is an essential
requirement in solving the City's escalating traffic problems. The development of
Ceannt Station, Galway Port, the East side of Eyre square and the proposed new office
blocks at the Docks will help Galway grow and enhance its image.
Mayor Larkin referred to the adopting of the Galway Transport Strategy in January
2017, which is a blueprint for the future transport needs for Galway covering a 20 year
horizon. The Mayor noted a number of Ambassadors that he had received in City Hall
including the visit of the Croatian President. He referenced the Mayor's awards and the
Mayoral Charity Ball which raised €13,000 for local charities.
The Mayor thanked his wife Rita and his family for their support over the past year in
his role as the Mayor of the City, he thanked the Deputy Mayor, Cllr. Flannery and all
the elected members, the staff of Corporate Services, the Chief Executive and
Management team and all the staff of the City Council for their support and assistance.
He also thanked Cathaoirleach Connolly who served in the County for the past year and
congratulated Cllr. Mannion as incoming Cathaoirleach and wished her well in her new
role. He thanked the media generally for their assistance during the year.
Mayor Larkin wished the new incoming Mayor and Deputy Mayor of the City of Galway
well and an enjoyable and successful year ahead.
Councillors then extended compliments to Mayor Larkin and congratulated him on his
achievements during his term. The achievements and highlights were noted and
acknowledged and members thanked the outgoing Mayor for his courtesy and fairness
and taking his role seriously, for demonstrating commitment to the role and his duties
as Mayor of the City and for representing the City locally, nationally and
internationally. Chief Executive, B. McGrath expressed thanks and compliments to the
Mayor on his behalf and all the staff in Galway City Council noting that Cllr. Larkin had
represented the City with dignity and pride during his term.
1. Election of Mayor
Cllr. Larkin sought nominations for the election of Mayor for the coming term.
Cllr. P. Flannery was proposed by Cllr. J. Walsh and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy.
Clarification was sought regarding Standing Orders, role call and voting procedures.
The Chief Executive, B. McGrath confirmed that once proposed and seconded, the
Councillor was deemed elected, unless no other candidate was put forward. He advised
that a role call would be taken if three elected members proposed same.
Cllr. J Walsh spoke in favour of his proposal and outlined the qualities, capabilities and
experience of Cllr. Flannery, which would make his a suitable and appropriate person
to become Mayor of Galway. Cllr. Fahy as a seconder of the proposal also spoke in
favour of the nomination of Cllr. Flannery and welcomed the presence of his father at
the meeting. No other nominations were received.
Cllr. Larkin declared Cllr. P. Flannery elected as Mayor of the City of Galway.
A number of Councillors then offered congratulations to Mayor Flannery and his family
on his election as Mayor of Galway. Councillors offered advice to the Mayor and wished
him all the best for the year ahead. His leadership qualities and abilities were noted
and Councillors welcomed him to the position and offered their support. The Chief
Executive, Mr. McGrath on behalf of the staff of the City Council congratulated
Mayor Flannery on his election and offered him the support of the Senior Management
team and all the staff of the Council. Cllr. P. Conneely congratulated the new Mayor and
referenced the historic role and status of the City of the Tribes and his opposition to
the amalgamation of the City and County Council into the future.
Mayor Flannery thanked the Councillors for his unanimous and unopposed election. He
said that he and his family were honoured and grateful. He also complimented and
thanked the outgoing Mayor Cllr. Larkin and wished him and his wife Rita every good
wish going forward. Mayor Flannery expressed gratitude for the support he got when
he ran initially for election and he promised to work hard on behalf of people of Galway
with honour, commitment and integrity.
As Mayor he hoped to bring at least one public meeting of the North & West Regional
assembly to Galway. Also, the Mayor referred to the city's world leading University,
NUIG and proposed to hold one meeting per annum hosted by the University. The
Mayor also acknowledged the very significant contribution of GMIT to Galway. Mayor
Flannery thanked friends in the media for their professionalism and courtesy and
looked forward to working with them over the coming year. He added that in the main
the City was blessed that local media were balanced, objective and served in the public
interest.
Mayor Flannery added that his goal as Chair will be to find a balance that ensures
voices are heard and that meetings are both productive and effective, and that at all
times the public interest will be best served.
As a businessman and ratepayer in his personal capacity, the Mayor said the City
Council can do more to continue to facilitate economic growth and develop
relationships and alliances with the business community. The Mayor expressed his
support for the Arts, Cultural and Sporting organisations in the City. He also referred to
the City's scenery, amenities and wonderful people. The Mayor informed the meeting
that it was his goal to fulfill a role of pragmatic inclusivity and further the aims of an
open, equal and diverse city, a city universally regarded as the Best Small City in the
Planet.
Mayor Flannery thanked his wife Örla and his family for their support and friendship.
2. Election of Deputy Mayor
Mayor Flannery sought nominations for the election of Deputy Mayor for the coming
term.
Cllr. M. Cubbard was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin and seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell.
Cllr. N Larkin spoke in favour of his proposal and informed the meeting that Cllr.
Cubbard is an excellent candidate. He said that Cllr. Cubbard was first elected as a
Councillor for the Westside in 2014 and that Cllr. Cubbard is the youngest Deputy
Mayor in the history of Galway City Council to his knowledge.
Mayor Flannery declared Cllr. M. Cubbard elected as Deputy Mayor.
Cllr. M. Cubbard thanked the Councillors for supporting him and said that it is a huge
honor after three years on the Council to be elected as Deputy Mayor. He referred to
his three children aged I, 2 and 7 years old and said that we should encourage young
people into politics. He informed the group that he was born and raised in a working
class Council house and it was a huge honour to take up this role.
Councillors congratulated Cllr. Cubbard on his election and also thanked and
complimented Mayor Flannery on is role as Deputy Mayor in the last year. The Chief
Executive, B. McGrath congratulated Cllr. Cubbard and offered the support of the staff
team, and wished Cllr. Cubbard a successful year ahead.
The meeting was adjourned for 15 minutes to allow for photographs.
3. Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
(a) Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd.
Appointment of One (1) Member (for a period of one year)
Previous Member: Cllr. D. McDonnell.
On the proposal of Cllr. Cubbard and seconded by Cllr. J. Walsh the outgoing member
Cllr. D. McDonnell was nominated for a further period of one year.
Mayor Flannery declared Cllr. D. McDonnell elected.
(b) Galway Civic Trust
Appointment of Two (2) Members (for a period of one year)
On the proposal of Cllr. McNelis and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. F. Fahy and
Cllr. B. Cameron were jointly nominated for a period of one year.
On the proposal of Cllr. M. Farrell and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M. Lohan and
Cllr. C. Conolly were jointly nominated for a period of one year.
A recorded vote was taken:
Votes in favour of Cllr. F Fahy and Cllr. B. Cameron 12
Votes in favour of Cllr. M. Lohan and Cllr. C. Connolly 6
Mayor Flannery declared Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. B. Cameron elected.
4. To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
A schedule of dates for Ordinary Meetings for the coming term were proposed by Cllr.
D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty. The dates as listed on the schedule were
unanimously agreed.
10th July 2017
17th July 2017 (Special Meeting)
11th September, 2017
9th October 2017
13th November, 2017
11th December, 2017
8th January, 2018
12th February, 2018
12th March, 2018
9th April, 2018
14th May, 2018
11th June, 2018
The meeting ended at 7.45 p.m.
Minutes, Confirmed &
Mayor of Gal
