Minutes of Special Housing Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Monday
23rd  June 2014 at 6.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Present:
Councillors: B. Cameron; Cathal Ó Conchúir; Catherine Connolly;
M.J. Crowe; O. Crowe; M. Cubbard; F. Fahy; M. Farrell; P. 
Flannery; P. Keane; N. Larkin; D. Lyons; A. Marley; D. 
McDonnell; N. McNelis; .
In Attendance:            Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
 Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, 
                            Ms. Laurena Mitchell, Senior Executive Officer, Housing
 Mr. Joe Tansey, Senior Engineer, Housing, Environment,     
 Recreation & Amenity.
 Mr. Patrick Foley,  Meetings Administrator,
  Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Apologies:
Cllr. John Walsh
1.    
OVERVIEW OF HOUSING SUPPLY
Summary of Main Provisions of Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2014
Housing Demand 
Social Housing Options:
- Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS)
- Long Term Leasing (LTL)
- Construction
- Voluntary
Housing Assistance Payments
Maintenance/Refurbishment Programme for Housing Stock
Housing Allocations/Voids
Traveller Accommodation Programme
Homelessness
Land Aggregation Scheme
Further to documentation previously submitted to Councillors, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Connell gave a brief overview on Housing Supply and the current options and
1

alternatives,  including  the  proposed  Housing  Assistance  Payment  (HAP).  He
outlined the current & future challenges facing supply of Housing. He highlighted
the Land Aggregation Scheme (LAGS) including the financial implications for City
Council in servicing outstanding loans for the purchase of lands a number of years
ago. Mr. Connell finished his summary outlining the significant progress of the
Capital Programme.
Ms. L. Mitchell Senior Executive Officer, Housing, summarised the main provisions
of the Housing (Misc Provisions) Bill 2014. She also spoke about the Housing
Assistance  Payment  and  Social  Housing  options  including  the  Rental
Accommodation Scheme, Long Term Leasing, Construction & Voluntary Housing.
Other  items  highlighted  by  Ms.  L.  Mitchell  included  Housing  Rent  Review,
Community Development & Estate Management, Traveller Accommodation Plan
and Homelessness.
Mr.  J.  Tansey,  Senior  Engineer,  outlined  the  main  works  within  the  Housing
Operations  Section.  These  included  Retrofit  Works  (Deep  &  Shallow),  Radon
Remediation,  Heating  Strategy,  Housing  Inspections,  Allocation  of  Vacant
properties & Housing Grants Scheme.
The following issues were raised by Councillors at the meeting:
Numbers of Households on the Housing Waiting List
Length of time to allocate certain properties
Difficulties with Landlords & Tenants participating on RAS and Long Term
Leasing

Resources required for Housing Assistance Payment

Future Plans for the residents of Carrowbrowne

Outstanding Loans for Land Purchase previously for housing
The following motion was proposed by Cllr. P Keane, seconded by Cllr. O Crowe.
“That Galway City Council condemns the manner in which the Dept of the
Environment & Local Government has refused to accept and take back loans it
provided to this council, particularly the loans in respect of lands purchased in
Ballyburke and Keeraun and this council calls on Ministers Phil Hogan and Jan O
Sullivan to direct that the said loans in the sum of €26m are immediately taken
back”
The Mayor called for a vote to be taken which resulted as follows:
In Favour:
13
Abstentions: 2
Absent:
2
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
2

The following motion was proposed by Cllr. A  Marley, seconded by Cllr. C Ó Conchúir 
“That this Council, acknowledges the ongoing housing crisis in Galway City and the
devastating impact this is having on the thousands of individuals & families who
desperately  require  quality,  long  term  housing.  Condemns  the  current
government's housing strategy that is administered by local authorities through the
RAS &  the Long  Term  Leasing Scheme  & relies heavily on an  expensive  and
unregulated private rental sector. Calls on City Management to write to the Dept of
Environment and request a significant financial investment in social housing stock
so as to reflect the magnitude of the housing crisis”
The Mayor called for a vote to be taken which resulted as follows:
In Favour:
10
Abstention:
5
Absent:
2
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
The Chief Executive, B. McGrath acknowledged the issues raised by Councillors including
the  fundamental  issue  of  Housing  Supply.  He  stated  that  the  difficulties  were
exacerbated by the Economic crash resulting in no direct state provision of housing and
reliance on the private rented sector.  He also spoke about long term vacant properties
and  emphasised  that  this  was  not  acceptable  and  not  going  to  continue.  These
properties would be turned over in a quicker timeframe. The Chief executive also
explained that there continued to be an embargo on staff recruitment. Galway City
Council was down 26% on staff and yet expected to continue with the same output of
work. 
The Chief Executive responded to queries relating to a housing allocation and the
ongoing examination of this matter.  At its conclusion, a report will be brought before
Council.
Implementation of the Traveller Accommodation Programme is a challenge, particularly
Carrowbrowne.  A robust process would need to be put in place to deal with the 13
families on site who need to move by December 2014. Also the appointment of a
dedicated Project Manager should assist with implementation of the plan.  
Mr McGrath also spoke about loans from the Housing Finance Agency taken out by
Galway  City  Council  towards  the  purchase  of  land  on  the  open  market  for  the
development of housing. This practise was encouraged by the Department and it was
envisaged that the loans would be paid off in phases.  With the Economic crash the lands
were never developed and the loans were to be put into the Land Aggregation Scheme.
However, it was decided to bring an end to this scheme and City Council has to provide
for substantial interest repayments on the loans.
The meeting concluded at 8.00p.m.
3
