  
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 
held on Monday 21st July 2014
 at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Present:
Councillors  B.  Cameron,  C.  Ó  Conchúir,  P.  Conneely,  C.
Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M.
Farrell,  P.  Flannery,  P.  Keane,  N.  Larkin,  A.  Marley,  D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh
In Attendance:          Mr. B. McGrath, City Manager,
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
  
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
 
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance,
Mr. B. Dunne, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
1.
A FULL PUBLIC UPDATE ON LEISURELAND
Mr T. Connell, Director of Services, stepped through his report, previously circulated,
regarding the Leisureland Complex. He outlined the background and history of the
complex and went on to give details of the damage caused by the storm in the first
week in January, the programme of remediation works; insurance issues including
business interruption and the future strategy and critical paths agreed.
Elected Members raised a range of issues that were discussed and were clarified by
Mr.  Connell  and  by  the  Chief  Executive. These  included the  current  and  past
membership of the board of Salthill Fáilte Ltd.; staffing issues; procurement; the
impact on the Salthill area of the closure of the complex; the role of the manager of
the  complex; the  hall,  the  gym,  the  pool, the  amusements and  mini-golf; the
estimated final figure for insurance purposes; flood defences and the role of City
Council vis a vis the governance and management of the complex. 
On the proposal of Cllr. McNelis, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, the following motion
was unanimously agreed:
“That the Director of Services gives monthly reports on the progress of works
and remediation process to all Councillors.”
In conclusion, the Mayor commended the water sports clubs for their patience over
recent months and looked forward to the re-opening of a top-class facility manned
by excellent staff. 
1

2.
A BRIEFING ON THE LPT AND THE IMPLICATIONS OF 
PROPOSED CHANGES TO SAME
The Mayor outlined advice he had received that, as a public consultation process
was underway, debate on this topic may not take place nor would he be accepting
motions on the topic of the Local Property Tax.
Elected Members requested clarification and Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance
referred to guidelines issued which precluded debate at the risk of prejudicing both
the process and the outcome of the consultation before it closes on 18th August. She
went on to outline how the submissions would be collated and a report presented to
the Corporate Policy Group by the end of August and the need to hold a Special
Meeting of Council, perhaps in the week beginning 15th August. 
Cllr M.J. Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. Keane, the following motion:
“That this Council allows a debate and discussion in relation to Item 2 on the
agenda entitled ‘A briefing on the LPT and the implications of proposed changes
to same”.
In favour of the motion: 8 Councillors. Against the motion: 10 Councillors. The Mayor
declared the motion defeated.
3.
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING 16TH JUNE AND 
ORDINARY MEETING 30TH JUNE
(a) 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING 16TH JUNE
On the proposal of Cllr. McNelis, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, the minutes of the
Ordinary Meeting of 16th June were agreed. 
Various Members raised a number of issues arising from the Minutes including:
Wolfe Tone Bridge; the testing and analysis of the soil at South Park; the location of
the stands for the city bike scheme; Pearse Stadium traffic management plan;
Gateway jobs scheme; grass-cutting; the unauthorised distribution of commercial
products in Eyre Square and response times from Irish Water to queries.
Directors of Services responded directly to queries and also agreed to furnish reports
on matters raised.
(b) 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING 30TH JUNE
On the proposal of Cllr. Conneely, seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, the minutes of the
Ordinary Meeting of 30th June were agreed. 
Various Members raised a number of issues arising from the Minutes including:
2

The Fire Service and the ‘Keeping Communities Safe’ Policy; signage regarding dog-
fouling; the membership of the European Capital of Culture 2020 (EcoC) Bid steering
and advisory groups and the Community Warden service.
In response, the Chief Executive confirmed that the County Council Director of
Services  with  responsibility  for  the  Fire  &  Rescue  Service  would  attend  two
Environment SPC meetings annually along with the Chief Fire Officer; that the
Community  Warden  service  will  be  reviewed  in  the  context  of  the  Outdoor
Workforce planning exercise and the membership of the ECoC 2020 groups would be
circulated.
4.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Motion under Standing Order 22 (to be taken without debate).
The following motion was proposed by Cllr. Marley, seconded by Cllr. Ó Conchúr:
“Galway City Council would like to express its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and condemns the current atrocities which are taking place in Gaza. 
 “We call on the Government to send a clear diplomatic message to the state of
Israel that these actions are not acceptable under international law and request
an immediate ceasefire by all parties, and failing these actions this Council also
calls on the Government to expel the Israeli Ambassador to Ireland”.
In favour of the motion: 15 Councillors. Against the motion: none. Abstaining: 3
Councillors. The Mayor declared the motion carried.
On the proposal of Cllr. Connolly, seconded by Cllr. Ó Conchúr, the following motion
was unanimously agreed:
“That this Council welcomes the extension of time to the 5th September 2014
given  by  City  Management  to  Community  Interest  Groups  in  the
Knocknacarra Community Centre and further that the City Manager and
Director  of  Services  work  with  the  community  and/or  a  community
representative group to ensure that the Community Centre is not run by a
private for profit entity and that the City Manager meet with and work with
the local Councillors to facilitate this aim and to bring back a full report to the
City Council before any decision is made.”
On the proposal of Cllr. Conneely, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, the following motion 
was unanimously agreed:
“We call on GCC in conjunction with Irish Water to immediately resolve the 
ongoing disruption to water supply to residents and businesses bordering on 
the Thomas Hynes Road”.
3

Cllr. O. Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, that the issue of busking be
discussed on the agenda of the September Ordinary Meeting.
Cllr. Connolly proposed, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, an amendment to this motion
which proposed the referral of the matter to the Environment SPC.
In favour of the amendment: 11 Councillors. Against the amendment: 7 Councillors.
The amendment was carried and became the substantive motion.
In favour of the motion to refer the matter of busking to the Environment SPC: 14
Councillors. Against the motion: 4 Councillors. The motion was carried.

Recommendations from Meeting of the Corporate Policy Group Meeting – 21st
July, 2014
On the recommendation of the Corporate Policy Group, it was proposed by Cllr.
McDonnell, seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty, that the full Mayoral Allowance be paid
(€10,000 vouched expenses and €10,000 taxable income) and the Deputy Mayoral
Allowance be approved for payment.
In favour of the motion: 13 Councillors. Against the motion: 4 Councillors. One
councillor was absent. The motion was carried.
On the recommendation of the Corporate Policy Group, it was proposed by Cllr.
Conneely, seconded by Cllr. McNelis, that a workshop be held on 26th August for
Elected Members and senior officials to examine strategic priorities and other issues.
In favour of the motion: 16 Councillors. Against the motion: none. Abstaining: 1
Councillor. One councillor was absent. The motion was carried.
The meeting adjourned.
4
