Presiding;
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 23rd September, 2019
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, F.
Fahy, O. Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty and P. O'Reilly.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services
D. Mahon, Director of Services
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Ms.
C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Ms.
Mr.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
None
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.02pm by welcoming Members, and advising Members that he will
take the Quarterly Reports from Recreation & Amenity first, followed by Economic Development & Culture.
The Mayor proposed to take a 15 minute break at 5.15pm and all agreed.
Item 1 (a) CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS - Recreation & Amenity
Mr. D. Mahon presented the Recreation & Amenity Quarterly Report circulated in July 2019.
Comments and queries from Members included:
Progress on Masterplans for Kingston & South Park; update on the diving boards at Blackrock; works on
playgrounds across the city including disability access; opening hours of Ballinfoile Community Centre; staff
resources in Recreation & Amenity; Citywide Tree Audit; proposed Cemetery at Dublin Road; Ballyloughane
beach; Hurling Walls; Dog fouling; Japanese Knotweed; Cycling Signs on the Prom; CCTV at Rahoon
Cemetery; Use of Cappagh Park facilities including feasibility study for a new pool; Pitch licences; Healthy
Green Cities; Grass-cutting; and works to allow the use of Basketball & Tennis Courts in the City next year.
The Mayor invited questions and clarifications.
Mr. D. Mahon & Ms C. Kilcoyne responded comprehensively to Members' questions and requests for
clarification.
The Chief Executive informed the meeting that in order for Galway City Council to proceed with the Sports
Capital grant for a water sport at Cappagh Park that an extensive feasibility study is required. Following a
tender process Mr. McGrath recommended that a consultant be appointed to carry out the extensive study
at an amount of €88,000 plus VAT. He advised Members that no budgetary provision was made for this cost
in 2019 budget. Mr McGrath praised the work of the Recreation & Amenity Department over the last
1 IP age
number of months. He also criticised the "mindless vandals" that vandalised Rahoon Cemetery on three
separate occasions this year and hoped that the Gardai trace the culprits who had caused much damage
and upset to families and the local community.
The Mayor proposed to deal with the following four Notice of Motions.
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
I propose that this Council do up a report informing Councillors of all the upgrading and improvements
that has taken place in Ballyloughane over the years as a number of Cllrs may not be familiar with the
improvements.
The Motion was withdrawn.
The Chief Executive informed Members that the improvements to Ballyloughane could be included in
Quarter 3 Recreation and Amenity Report.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNeilis
That the Council approve the appointment of Consultants and provision of funding to start the process
of a Feasibility Study for development of Cappagh Park Pool Project that was tendered in May 2019
In Favour: 17 Against: O
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. P. O Reilly
That GCC commits to cease the use of glycophosphate in the City and calls on the Minister for Health &
Agriculture to ban the use of glycophosphate as a desiccant on our nation's crops.
In Favour: 17 Against: O
The Motion was assed.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O Connor
That GCC publish an information leaflet on Japanese Knotwood.
In Favour: 17 Against: O
The Motion was withdrawn.
Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 1 (a) (v) Economic Development & Culture
Mr. B. Barrett presented the Economic Development & Culture Quarterly Report circulated in July 2019.
Questions and clarifications from Members included:
Additional funding for Comedy Festival & Food on the Edge; how much money remained in the Sinking
Fund; Marketing Fund criteria; Sandy Road replacement update; success of Leisureland over last 12
months; role of the Tourism Officer; deadline for funding the Museum; use of the GRETB unit in Liosban
Industrial Estate; current tourism figures for the city; and the successful launch of the Galway 2020
programme.
21 Page
Mr. B. Barrett responded comprehensively to Members questions and clarifications. He advised that the
opening balance of the Marketing Fund at the start of 2019 was €568,610.
The Chief Executive welcomed comments from Members in relation to the successful launch of Galway
2020. He confirmed that Galway 2020 had been invited to the October Council Meeting, and outlined some
of the events that would take place across the city and county in 2020.
Proposed by: Cllr. N. Mc Neilis Seconded by: Cllr. P. O Reilly
This Council allocates the following funds from the Marketing Fund: Propose that an increase of
€20,000 for Galway Comedy Festival towards the filming of the festival this October and that an
increase of €10,000 towards Food on the Edge Festival also taking place in late October to be
allocated.
In favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O
Additional funding was approved.
Present: 16
The Mayor proposed that Members take a 15 minute break. This was agreed by all.
The Mayor reconvened the meeting at 5.35pm.
Item 1 (a) (i) Transport & Infrastructure
Mr. U. Finn presented the Transport & Infrastructure Quarterly Report circulated in July 2019.
Comments and queries from Members included:
Salmon Weir Bridge; 405 Bus Route; Irish Rail; UTMC; Bus corridors; Western Rail Corridor; one way system
around the Cathedral; traffic lights out of sync; increased bike stations and cycling infrastructure; flashing
amber lights; speed limits; illegal parking on disabled bays and UHG; Barna Greenway; Ballindooley Cross
and Headford Road; removal of Skerrit Roundabout and implementation of Galway Transport Strategy.
Cllr. J. Connolly proposed to extend the Meeting until 8.30pm. This was seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe and
agreed by all.
Mr. U. Finn & the CE B. McGrath provided comprehensive responses to Members' questions and
clarifications.
NOM 33/2019
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty
That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence
as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates, Sli Burca, Sli
Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the
upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 14
31 Page
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O Connor
To investigate possibility of prioritising cycle facilities including segregated cycle lanes outside all
schools.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 14
Proposed by: Cllr. O. Crowe Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
That a maintenance contract be put in place for a 24 hours a day, 7 days a week in relation to traffic
lights across the city.
Motion Withdrawn
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O. Connor
That GCC commit to examining doubling the existing number of bike stands throughout the city by Dec
2020.
Motion deferred to next Ordinary Meeting in October
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. M. O. Connor
That GCC introduce a 30km zone for all City Schools
Motion Withdrawn
Seconded by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane
In circumstances where a bus station has been constructed on Fairgreen Road with every ancillary
convenience and capacity, that Galway City Council immediately revokes all consents issued to all
private bus operators to drop off and/or pick up and/or park on Merchants Road, Galway.
Deferred to Transport SPC
Proposed by: Cllr. A. Cheevers Seconded by: Cllr. J. Connolly
That Galway City Council call on larnrod Éireann and the NTA would look for approval for funding from
the Urban Regenration Fund and Department of Transport for a designated commuter train from
Athenry to Galway City.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was passed
Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
That GCC install planned traffic calming measures on the Siobhan McKenna Road as a matter of
urgency.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was passed
4 IP age
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that this council seek funding from the NTA to remove the Skerrit Roundabout and to
replace it with traffic lights.
The Motion was deferred to next Ordinary Meeting in October
Proposed by: Cllr. T. O Flaherty Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
In the interest of health and safety I propose that the shrubbery on the Skerrit Roundabout be cut
back to allow for pedestrians to witness the on-coming traffic approaching roundabouts.
The Motion was withdrawn
Proposed by: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded by: Cllr. P. O Reilly
As part of the review of the speed limit byelaws, that GCC includes a 30km zone outside city schools
where it is compliant with Dept of Transport guidelines.
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 14
The Motion was passed
The meeting concluded at 8.30pm.
Mi
s, Co .r ed& igned
Mayor of Galway
5 IP age
