Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held in the Ardilaun Hotel and virtually on zoom platform
Presiding
Present
Present (virtually)
Apologies
Present
Present (virtually)
on Monday 24th April 2023 at 3.00 pm.
Cllr. C. Higgins, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, A. Curran, J. Connolly, E. Hoare,
P. Keane, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty & N. McNelis,
Councillors: C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, N. Larkin
& M. O'Connor,
Councillor: N. Murphy
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
P, Philbin, Director of Services
B. Barrett, A/Director of Services
H. Martyn, A/Senior Executive Officer
E. Fanning, Senior Engineer
A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator
G. Reilly, Assistant Staff Officer
A. Kenny, Administrative Officer
H. Kilroy, A/Director of Services/Head of Finance
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
E. Purcell, Clerical Officer
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator, commenced the meeting with a statement of
intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a
moment of silent reflection.
Mayor C. Higgins welcomed all to the meeting.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the meeting conclude at 18:30 with a break at 16:45 for fifteen
minutes. This was seconded by Mayor C. Higgins and agreed by Council.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed a 5 minute speaking time in relation to the Housing Quarterly
Report. This was seconded by Mayor C. Higgins and agreed by Council.
1. Housing Quarterly Report — January to March, 2023
Mr. Brian Barrett, A/Director of Services gave a detailed summary of the Housing Quarterly
Report and housing operational services.
Ms. Patricia Philbin, Director of Services gave a high-level overview of the capital delivery
programme including targets and challenges. She outlined changes to the Part 8 plannin
process.
1
d & Signa
e,co
Mayo of G
Queries and clarifications raised by Elected Members are grouped into categories for ease of
reference as follows:
Housing Operations Individual Queries included:
Clarification on the figures on the Housing Waiting Lists for East & West.
Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme: Query re: figures - total drawn down, 2 in
process — what stage are the others at. Are all estates in the City eligible for TIP and
can a list of eligible estates be circulated to Councillors?
Request for the breakdown of 27 notifications granted for Travellers.
Tenant in Situ Scheme - Are we offering prices based on a value or the market value.
Cost rental model - what is the housing update — are there funds available?
Housing Maintenance — Time frame unacceptable — some properties not being
maintained. What are we doing to ensure that tenants keep their properties
maintained - there are tenants with health issues due to dampness.
Choice Based Letting — has everyone on the list registered and can we be sure that
everyone who should be on this list is on it.
Clarification on Disabled Persons Grants figures.
Tenant purchase — joint tenancy query.
Estate management — anti social behaviour — how can we deal with this issue.
Housing First — What is happening to find one bed properties in the City.
Homeless/Travellers — Travellers account for 80% of applications for emergency
housing — what is the breakdown of figures.
National Housing Strategy for disabled people — when is this plan going to be
implemented.
Implementation of Traveller Accommodation Programme — the committee.
undertook to write to the Department on this, has this been done.
HAP Homeless Finder — Is 17 inclusive of 427 or in addition.
Trends — how do we compare & plan.
Air B n Bs — Should be plenty of student beds available over the summer but they are
being let out via Air B n B.
How many in HAP are homeless? Not enough being done.
Reference made to 2 bed waiting list and length of it —families with 2 children of the
same gender should be allowed to express an interest in 3 bed houses.
Management of Homeless Services — do we get additional staff for managing this for
the local authories in the Region?
Cold weather response ended in March - Can the time period be extended?
Housing should be a Human Right in the Constitution.
How much does emergency accommodation cost per annum, cost of maintenance
fees for housing tenants.
Approved Housing Bodies — What is flaw in legislation?
Reference made to short-term letting, how many staff in planning working in this
area.
How many notices to quit have been received.
.Bousing Capital Individual Queries included:
2
Where does the money from housing sold by the Council go?
10 Notices of abandonment— what are they are how are they dealt with? Where are
they listed and what is the process?
Housing development on Circular Road - €2m for 5 units — what is being built?
58 units in Ballybane — clarification if there is still an issue in relation to this project.
Development land — how much has the City Council acquired in the last 12 months.
The Council need to look at modular housing.
There is no database for vacant homes — Approx. 6,000 in Co. Galway
Only 6 vacant sites registered.
Vacant sites levy — only €20k collected in 2020
Social & Affordable Housing — 50% should be social and 50% affordable
Ballyburke Site — Vast majority of site affordable
Merlin Woods —€5.7 million at least 5 years ago — why is it taking so long?
Request for update on the Ballybane housing for the elderly.
Part V —6 Units — 10% affordable and 10% social housing — how is it so low.
Merchants' Road development — how will this happen.
Reference also made regarding issue around student accommodation and National
Housing Strategy.
Planning System not fit for purpose — NPF (National Planning Framework) has failed.
Voids — how many voids in place and what proposals to expedite same?
Reference made to the land on Henry Street — any engagement with the owner?
Can we get commitment to engage with the owner.
Lower Salthill Halting Site — Any contract on this.
How long does it take to proceed a loan application for Crof Conaithe Scheme — Is
this being administered?
Did we seek funding for two sites under service site funds (Keeraun & Castlegar) and
can we.
Ballybane — Request for a start date.
Reference to Kilkenny —4,500 houses & 3 Schools being built? Can Galway City
Council do this.
24 units in Castlegar, refused planning because not compliant with national
sustainable development.
Ardaun — Can funding come from Central Government to assist the project.
General:
Is there adequate staff in housing office?
How are planners working with housing?
It was proposed the Council write to the Minister to seek funding for new vacant
property staff.
Reference to Limerick City & County Council who took on temporary staff to help
alleviate pressure on housing staff — Can Galway City do this?
Housing Department is split between two Directors of Services, would like to see it
back to one Director.
What is the full cohort of staffing in Housing — how many vacant posts currently? Can
we stop staff leaving the housing department.
3
• Councils were offered funding to take on extra staff— did this happen.
• Update on new Housing Estate Liaison Officers in estates
Mayor C. Higgins proposed a 15-minute break at 5:00pm. This was agreed by Council. The
meeting resumed at 5:15pm
Mayor C. Higgins requested an update on letters sent to three Ministers regarding a meeting
with Galway City Council.
Ms. A. Rohan advised that general acknowledgements were received from Minister O'Brien
and Minister Ryan and that tentative dates were sought by Minister O'Donnell.
Mayor C. Higgins requested contact be made again to arrange meeting. This was agreed.
Mr. B. Barrett, A/Director of Services responded to queries regarding Housing operations:
• Heritage properties are an exception to over-the-shop city centre refurbishments.
Significant cost in renovating heritage properties and may other conditions.
• Crof Cénaithe national advertising campaign, targeted media channels to first time
buyers etc. We can look at promoting this locally. Expected increase in grant may result
in a second media campaign. Feedback so far is that the grant amount is not sufficient to
attract applications.
• How much staff is enough; strategic review of staff is being constructed, as part of
strategic workforce plan for next year.
Ms. P. Philbin responded to queries raised on the housing capital programme:
No staff assigned specifically to short term lets;
Ballybane — it could be 2024/25 before this progresses;
Single stage process has not been utilised to date, if we do, additional costs are covered
by the Local Authority if they increase;
Modular homes — looking at establishing a framework for suppliers, planning
permissions are required (there was an exception for Ukrainians);
Coast road development due for Q3 2023.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive responded to queries and clarifications raised. He confirmed
that a Report on what land is owned by the Council and where it is. The Chief Executive
suggested other Councillors could possibly sit in on the Housing Strategic Policy Committee
meeting to drill down through housing figures.
Cllr. D. Lyons welcomed the invitation for any councillors to attend the Housing Strategic
Policy Committee as Chair, to follow up on Housing figures.
Mayor C. Higgin respectfully asked the Fianna Fåil and Fine Gael party Councillors to apply
pressure regarding a meeting with Ministers.
4
Mayor C. Higgins referred Councillors to motions submitted at the meeting for
consideration.
Pro osed By: Cllr. l. Byrne
Seconded By: Cllr. J. Connoll
That Galway City Council should as a matter of urgency meet with the Third Level and
Further Education sector providers in the city to consider student accommodation
deficits and possible interventions in the city.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was carried.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that the two housing developments planned for Ballyburke and
Clybaun Road Lower would be 80% affordable housing and 20% social housing. This was
seconded by Mayor C. Higgins.
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services advised that the Ballyburke scheme is under an
accelerated delivery proposal, the terms of which specify that all units must be social
housing. Approval must be sought for the affordable units in Clybaun.
The Chief Executive recommended that the Motion could be listed on the agenda for a
future Council Meeting and considered by Council after a full report on the subject is issued.
Cllr. A. Curran proposed the following motion: This Council calls for the following actions
concerning residential land, vacant land registers, and vacancy officers:
a)
b)
c)
The development of comprehensive masterplans for all zoned residential land that
has not been built on or have valid planning applications, ensuring efficient and
sustainable use of land for housing development, infrastructure, public transport,
and community facilities.
A thorough review and justification for why each parcel of residential zoned land
that has not been built on is not on the vacant land register, with the aim to rectify
discrepancies or omissions and provide transparent information on the register.
To ask the Minister in the Department for Housing, Local Government and Heritage,
Darragh O'Brien, for additional funding for the immediate hiring of additional
vacancy officers to improve the identification of vacant properties and land, and to
enforce levies effectively, thereby promoting the development of vacant and
underutilised properties and contributing to the city's housing supply.
By implementing these measures, Galway City Council aims to promote responsible and
sustainable development of residential land and encourage the use of vacant and
underutilised properties in contributing to the city's growth and vitality.
This was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
The Chief Executive recommended that this Motion remain on the agenda for the May
Ordinary Council Meeting and be considered by Council after a full report on the context
surrounding the subject of the motion is issued to Councillors.
5
Proposed By: Cllr. C. Higgins
Seconded By: Cllr. N. McNelis
We call on the Government to increase vacant property refurbishment grant rates from
their current €30,000 / €50,000 to €50,000 / €80,000 as a minimum threshold with a
higher level of grant to be considered in the City.
In Favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 15
This Motion was carried.
Cllr. C. Connolly submitted three Motions for consideration at the meeting. Cllr. C. Connolly
proposed a Roll Call Vote for the below motion. This was supported by Cllr. M. Cubbard and
Cllr. N. McNelis. Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed that this Motion be circulated to all local
authorities. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly and agreed by Council.
Ms. A. Rohan, Meetings Administrator proceeded to take a Roll Call Vote:
Proposed By: Cllr. C. Connolly
Seconded By: Cllr. A. Curran
'That Galway City Council calls on the Government to call a referendum to enshrine the
right to housing in the Irish Constitution.'
That this Motion be circulated to all local authorities.
In Favour: Cllrs. l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, A. Curran, F. Fahy, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, N. McNelis,
M. O'Connor & T. O'Flaherty
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was carried.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed the following Motion and requested a Roll Call Vote. This was
supported by Cllrs. M. Cubbard and N. McNelis. The Motion was discussed by Councillors.
Seconded By: Cllr. A. Curran
Pro osed By: Cllr. C. Connolly
'That Galway City Council condemns the recent Government decision to remove the ban
on evictions and further calls for a reinstatement of the Eviction Ban as pertained
previously/
Given the time constraints, Mayor C. Higgins proposed that a Special meeting be held on the
22nd of May at 3pm to consider outstanding Notices of Motions, and to include
consideration of the Local Government Boundary Arrangements for Galway City Council at
this meeting. Mayor C. Higgins also proposed that the Council endeavour to consider all
Motions on the agenda for the Ordinary Council Meeting by June. This was agreed by
Council.
Council noted the third Motion that was submitted by Cllr. C. Connolly 'That GCC demands
that in view of Government plans to remove Development Levies, which currently provide
for essential infrastructure, that an equivalent funding allocation will be provided to this
Local Authority.
The meeting concluded at 18:30.
6