Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
A Io ies:
Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 24th June 2019,
at 3.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, M. O'Connor, T. O'Flaherty and P. O'Reilly.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms. R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms. N. Moggan, A/ Head of Finance
Mr. H. Martyn, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Ms. Sharon Carroll, Administrative Officer
Mr. C. Kelly, Atlantic Economic Corridor Officer
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. J. Mullin, Irish Officer
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllr O. Crowe
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 3.02pm by welcoming Members, and advising of his intention to
take a 15 minute break at 5.15pm, and to conclude the meeting by 7.30pm. This was agreed.
Item 1 — Confirmation of Minutes
The Mayor invited matters of accuracy on Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City
Council, 13th May 2019. A discussion ensued on a Motion to submit questions on minutes for a written
response from the executive, with the motion subsequently withdrawn by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Cllr. D. McDonnell noted an error in the spelling of Corrib Park on page 3.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. N. McNelis
I propose to adopt Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th May 2019.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 1 (a) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th May 2019, were adopted.
The Mayor invited clarifications on Item 1 (b) Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th May 2019.
Clarifications from Members included an update on Sailin to Silverstrand, and Cllr. C. ConnollVs
attendance at the meeting, which was noted as 'apologies' in error.
Proposed by: Cllr. D, McDonnell Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose to adopt Item 1 (b) Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th May 2019.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 1 (b) Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council, 13th May 2019, were adopted.
The Mayor invited clarifications on Item 1 (c) Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, 7th
June 2019.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
I propose to adopt Item 1 (c) Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, 7th June 2019.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 1 (c) Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, 7th June 2019, were adopted.
Item 2 (a) Raising of a Loan in relation to the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan
Scheme
Ms. H. Martyn reported on the raising of a loan in relation to the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme,
including requirements for application, and the number of loan applications received/ drawn down.
Galway City Council have been advised by the Department that the RIHL scheme remains open, and to
continue to take applications. City Council have been advised by the Department to raise a further loan
of €5 million for the scheme, with approval of Members now sought to proceed.
Queries and clarifications raised by Members included:
Reasons for ineligibility; interest rates; outreach to unsuccessful applicants; mortgage protection;
number of homes that will be funded with the new loan; credible savings; credit committee; comparison
with other local authorities; appeal process; market value of homes in the scheme; self-employed
applicants.
Ms. S. Carroll responded comprehensively to Members' queries, and advised Members that the rate of
approval is increasing over time. Ms. S. Carroll reported to Members that confirmation was now sought
to approve a resolution to approve the drawdown of a loan of €5 million to extend the scheme further to
the year end. This funding would come through the Department, not the City Council. Ms. S. Carroll
advised Members of the national website/ helpline for the scheme.
Ms. H. Martyn further advised Members that applicants can reapply if unsuccessful on the first
application, with some applicants applying in both the City and the County.
21 Page
Proposed by: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Proposal to approve the Raising of a Loan in relation to the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan
Scheme, as outlined.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 2 (a) — Raising of a Loan in relation to the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme was
approved.
Item 2 (b) Election to Udarés na h'OIlscoile — Gaillimh. Nomination by Council
straight vote.
The Meetings Administrator advised Members on the process for election of a Member to the board of
Udarås na h'Ollscoile — Gaillimh, following the departure of former Cllr. P. Flannery. A single nomination
by straight vote is required. The Mayor invited nominations.
Cllr. P. O'Reilly was proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley.
There were no further nominations, so the Mayor deemed Cllr. P. O'Reilly elected. The Chief Executive
clarified that the nomination was for the remainder of the term of the current Üdarås until 2021.
Item 2 (c) Appointment to Galway City Joint Policing Committee (JPC)
i. Nomination of Eleven (11) Members to the Galway. City. Joint Policing Committee
The Meetings Administrator advised Members that this item had been deferred from the Annual
Meeting, with the original agenda item inadvertently advising that there were 11 positions to be filled,
plus the Mayor ex oficio, based on the Minutes from the 2014 annual meeting. This had later been
corrected, to clarify that the total number of positions were 11, with other stipulations referring to Local
Area, and Gender.
The Mayor advised that 12 Nominations had been received at the Annual Meeting, namely:
11.
IV.
V.
VI.
Vil.
Vill.
IX.
x.
XII.
Cllr. N. McNelis was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin
Cllr. E. Hoare was proposed by Cllr. C. Higgins and seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy
Cllr. A. Cheevers was proposed by Cllr. J. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe
Cllr P. Keane was proposed by Cllr. M.J. Crowe and seconded by Cllr. J. Connolly
Cllr. M. Cubbard was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell
Cllr. P. O'Reilly was proposed by Cllr. M. O'Connor, and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
Cllr. F. Fahy was proposed by Cllr. E. Hoare and seconded by Cllr. C. Higgins
Cllr. D. Lyons was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin and seconded by Cllr. O. Hanley
Cllr. N. Larkin was proposed by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty and seconded by the Mayor
Cllr. O. Hanley was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly
Cllr. M. O'Connor was proposed by Cllr. P. O'Reilly and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Cllr. M. J. Crowe requested that the Mayor remove the Nomination for Cllr. P. Keane, and nominate Cllr.
M. J. Crowe. This change was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell, and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
Cllr. N. Larkin withdrew his name for consideration.
31 Page
Nominations were proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly and agreed. The
Mayor deemed the following Members elected to the JPC: Cllrs. N. McNelis; E. Hoare; A. Cheevers; M. J.
Crowe; P. O'Reilly; F. Fahy; D. Lyons; T. O'Flaherty; O. Hanley; M. O'Connor, and M. Cubbard.
Election of Chairperson of the Galway City Joint Policing Committee
ii.
Cllr. N. McNelis was proposed by the Mayor for the role of Chairperson of the JPC. The nomination was
seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin.
Proposed by: Mayor M. Cubbard Seconded by: Cllr. N. Larkin
I nominate Cllr. N. McNelis as Chairperson of the Galway City Joint Policing Committee.
In favour: 10 Against: 7 Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Nomination was successful.
Item 2 (d) Galway Civic Trust - Appointment of Two (2) Members for a period of
one year. Non Group — Appointment by Vote.
The Meetings Administrator advised that this item had been deferred from the Annual Meeting, at the
agreement of Members. Communication had been received from the current Chair of the Civic Trust,
advising that they would welcome the nomination of Members with a background in heritage,
environmental and financial skills, to advise on best practice.
The Chief Executive advised that the Trust had requested a meeting with him, and proposed that
Members defer a decision on Item 2 (d) pending the outcome of this meeting. Cllr. D. Lyons proposed the
motion, which was seconded by Cllr. M. O'Connor and agreed.
Item 2 (e) To Consider Appointment of Procedures Committee of City Council.
The Meetings Administrator advised Members of the requirements for the Procedures Committee - the
Procedures Committee should consist of a representative of each political grouping and the Committee
is chaired by the Mayor ex officio.
Nominations:
11.
IV.
V.
VI.
Cllr. N. Larkin was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell to
represent Independent Councillors.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe was proposed by Cllr. P. Keane, and seconded by Cllr. J. Connolly.
Cllr. P. O'Reilly was proposed by Cllr. M. O'Connor, and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons.
Cllr. O. Hanley was proposed by the Mayor, and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly.
Cllr. N. McNelis was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin, and seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons
Cllr. F. Fahy was proposed by Cllr. C. Higgins, and seconded by Cllr. E. Hoare.
The Mayor declared Cllrs. N. Larkin; M.J. Crowe; P. O'Reilly; O. Hanley; N. McNelis; and F. Fahy to be
Members of the Procedures Committee of City Council.
41 Page
The Chief Executive advised Members as part of Item 2 Nominations to Boards, that the Local Traveller
Accommodation Committee has currently 5 nominations for 6 Board positions. The Chief Executive
advised that it would be worthwhile filling all 6 positions.
Cllr. F. Fahy was nominated by Cllr. E. Hoare and seconded by Cllr. C. Higgins.
Proposed by: Cllr. E. Hoare Seconded by: Cllr. C. Higgins
I nominate Cllr. F. Fahy to the Local Traveller Accommodation Committee.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
The Nomination was successful.
Item 4 (a) Approval of funding under Local Community Festivals 2019
Mr. G. McMahon reported on the request for approval of funding under the Local Community Festivals
2019 grant. The Mayor invited clarifications from Members.
Question and clarifications from Members included: Scale of the grants; management of noise/ toilets;
staff reviewing applications.
Mr. G. McMahon responded comprehensively to Members' queries.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Item 4 (a) I propose approval of funding under the Local Community Festivals 2019.
In favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O
Present: 17
Item 4 (a) Funding under Local Community Festivals 2019 was approved.
Item 4 (b) To receive an update in relation to the City Centre Site at the Dyke
Road from Mr. Phelim O'Neill, Land Development Agency.
The Chief Executive presented a report on options for the Dyke Road redevelopment and the Black Box
theatre. No protected structures are on the Black Box site, with the theatre requiring significant upgrade
or replacement. He advised that a proposal for a library on a different site was likely to come forward in
due course.
The Chief Executive advised Members that Mr. Phelim O'Neill from the Land Development Agency had
been invited to prepare a detailed site analysis, in order to make proposals for consideration for the site.
Mr. P. O'Neil gave a report on options for the Dkye Road site, and the role of the Land Development
Agency. The report also included an initial feasibility study for the Sandy Road site.
The Mayor thanked Mr. P. O'Neill for his report, and invited questions from Members.
Questions and comments from Members included:
Inclusion of hotel/ student accommodation in the proposal; cultural features; vehicle thoroughfare;
extension of the Headford Road Shopping Centre; flooding; provision of homes on the site; role of the
LDA; bridge to the university; consultation with residents; parking revenue; funding and payback on
development; Local Area Plan; cost rental schemes; mixed use; underground parking; funding for
5 IP age
affordable apartments; commercial/ industrial zoning of the site; commercial rates receivable;
reinvestment in cultural centre; Galway Convention Bureau; facilities for the Rowing Club; reliance of
retail on existing parking; generation of funding for Climate Change measures; expansion of City Centre;
inclusion of walk/ bikeways; development timeline; financial benefit of redevelopment; route of
Greenway; market value of the site.
Mr. B. McGrath responded to Members' queries, and advised Members that the proposal was an initial
feasibility study and options analysis, to create funding to invest into cultural facilities, including a library,
the Black Box and a cultural space. The LDA had been asked to look at options to maximise the economic
return on the site, in order to do this. Replacing the bridge over the railway, through URDF funding,
would be transformative for the city and will support the Connemara Greenway. The Sandy Road site
offers potential for more transformative development, by providing residential use at 20 acres close to
Eyre Square.
At 5.11pm, the Mayor left the Chair, and Deputy Mayor Cllr. Donal Lyons took the Chair. The Mayor
resumed the Chair at 5.13pm.
Mr. P. O'Neill also responded to Members' queries. He advised Members that theatre space/ amenity for
700-1000 people can cost in the region of €20million to €40million, making such a development unviable
in the current site. The current report was to explore what would be economically feasible for the site,
with regard to flooding, standards for student accommodation vs. residential units, and potential future
uses of the site, including the impact of changes in modal mix.
At 5.50pm, the Mayor called a recess and advised Members that the meeting would reconvene at
6.05pm.
The meeting reconvened at 6.23pm.
Item 4 (d) To consider the date for a Workshop between Councillors and Senior
Officials in relation to the Local Authority Work Programme.
The Mayor invited Members to consider a date for a Workshop between Councillors and Senior Officials
in relation to the Local Authority work programme. The date of 15th July from 3.00-6.00pm, off site, was
proposed and agreed.
Item 4 (c) Galway 2020 Update — to receive a presentation from Ms. Patricia
Philbin, CEO, and Ms. Helen Marriage, Creative Director.
The Mayor advised Members that Item 4 (c) and Emergency Motions per Standing Order 34 would be the
last item taken on the Agenda at this meeting.
Ms. P. Philbin reported on Galway2020, and gave apologies on behalf of Mr. Arthur Lappin, who had
been available for the original meeting date but was away for the deferred meeting date. Ms. H.
Marriage, Creative Director, invited Members to the launch of the official Galway2020 programme on
the 18th September 2019, and presented highlights of the programme.
The Mayor invited questions and clarifications. Queries from Members included:
61 Page
Public engagement and knowledge of programme; funding; role of Macnas and Druid; multinational
inclusion; legacy of Galway2020; financial reports; Small Towns, Big Ideas; sister cities; linkages with
sport/ GAA; school engagement;
Ms. P. Philbin and Ms. H. Marriage responded comprehensively to Members' queries, and advised that
fundraising would continue beyond the launch of the programme, with a number of seasonal
programmes offering an opportunity to add new programme elements as further funding was secured.
Ms. P. Philbin advised that 2018 accounts have been audited and submitted to the CRO. Internal
accounts go to the Board, but she would look to make expenditure and income information available to
Members.
The Chief Executive summarised the benefits and legacy of European Capital of Culture on other cities,
noting that every €1 invested yields €7 in ECOCs.
Item 9 - Conferences and Approved Training:
Conferences and approved training were proposed by Cllr. C. Connolly and seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell, and agreed.
1) Title: Environmental Impact & Appropriate Assessment - Examine Recent Cases and Practical
Developments
Date: 5th of September & 11th of July 2019
Venue: Sandyford, Dublin 18
Item 10 — Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations
Votes of Sympathy/ Congratulations were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons, and seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly
and agreed.
Votes of Sympathy:
Manus Flynn, R.I.P.
Liam King, R.I.P.
Frances Burke, R.I.P.
Patrick Stephen Fahy, R.I.P.
Pakie John Barrett, R.I.P.
Vincent Griffin, R.I.P.
Michael (Mick) Burke, R.I.P.
Mattie Fahy, R.I.P.
Mary Moggan, R.I.P.
Tony Heffernan, R.I.P.
Votes of Congratulations:
Corrib Rangers F.C.
The Mayor advised Members that due to the time, Motions could not be taken at this point. He advised
Members that they would be the first item at the July meeting, which would take place at 3.00pm on
Monday 8th July.
The Meeting concluded at 7.30pm.
71 Page
Item 4 Consideration of Reports of Officials
e) LED Street Light Replacement Programme. Not considered.
f) Update on the Irish Language Plan. Not considered.
g) Chief Executives Report June 2019. Not considered.
Item 5 — Notices of Motion
NOM 18/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the overwhelming evidence that a Climate and Biodiversity
emergency is evident from the research and that local action is crucial.
As such that Galway City Council immediately implements the following steps:
•
Declares a Climate Emergency for Galway City
Commits to putting in place a Climate Action Plan
Declares a Biodiversity Emergency for Galway City
Updates and puts in place a Biodiversity Plan for Galway City
Commits to reporting back with an update on Climate and Biodiversity action at every Council
meeting
Establish a Climate Action Committee comprised of elected members and representatives of
civil society in Galway City to meet within three months, whose remit would include prioritising
transport, energy and flood protection measures consistent with a sustainable approach to the
Climate Emergency
Not considered.
NOM 19/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council gives its support for and requests that the Minister for Housing, Planning,
Community and Local Government move to put in place a restriction on election posters as follows:
• Banning election posters outside of designated places in Ireland
• Requiring local authorities to supply at least two designated spaces in each Local Authority
Area for the display of authorised election material
• That such designated spaces be at eye level thereby allowing for the display of readable policy
proposals by all candidates running for election
• That all election candidates be given equal space for display
• That such designated spaces only be permitted to be in use for the election period as laid down
by law
Not considered.
NOM 20/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly
Date Received: 5th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the importance of increased transparency regarding the business
of the Council Chamber and therefore:
81 Page
Permits for the live streaming of all council meetings that are open to the public by an
authorised agent, to start no later than three months hence
Commits to providing a transcript of council meetings; said transcript to be made available on
the Galway City Council website
Will provide training to councillors regarding their legal obligations in relation to statements
made in a public forum
Response Issued with Agenda.
NOM 21/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council calls on the devolved Scottish Government to immediately withdraw threats made
against Irish Fishermen fishing legally in the waters around the island of Rockall. Further we call on the
Irish Government to ensure the protection of Irish Fishermen currently fishing waters there.
Not considered.
NOM 23/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
Galway City Council develop a segregated Cycle Lane along the Western Distributor Rd between the
junction of Cappagh Rd and Millers Lane.
Not considered.
NOM 24/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. John Connolly
Date Received: 10th June 2019
This Council calls on the Minister for Education to reinstate History as core mandatory subject of the
Junior Cycle.
Not considered.
NOM 28/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Owen Hanley
Date Received: 14th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognise the importance of making decision processes as transparent and
ease-of-use friendly.
Therefore, this Council shall record all Passed Motions during the main Council meetings, as well as
any special meetings and the Annual Meeting, for the purposes of uploading into a specific section
available on the Galway City Council website.
• That the Section be broken into Council terms and list individual motions.
• That motions within that subsection be listed in Chronological order from most recent to oldest
• That they be recorded in full with Councillors votes included.
• For the purposes of this motions that this recording shall begin on the day this motion would
be passed and here after, but not require a retroactive record of previously passed motions at
this point.
Not considered.
NOM 29/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Owen Hanley
Date Received: 14th June 2019
That Galway City Council recognises the needs of peoples with disabilities for a proportionate amount
of social housing and the lack of that at the moment. And in respect of those unique requirements
makes the following adjustments of the Differential Rent Scheme 2019:
91 page
• That Disability Allowance be included in the income that receives a 5 Euro deduction under
Section 5.3 as a calculation of the rent per recipient
• That those in receipt of Disability Allowance be given a fixed minimum of 30 Euro weekly rent
in Section 7
Futhermore, recognition of education as a core part of providing susEainable and independent living
and that the Council should provide proper supports to achieve that.
• That under Section 5.2 the definition ofa dependent child be raised from 16 years to 18 years
of age
• That under Section 5.2 the allowance of young adult children in full-time education be
extended from 21 years to 22 years
Response issued with Agenda
NOM 30/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Owen Hanley
Date Received: 14th June 2019
That Galway City Council implement a wider strategy of opening the city centre more to the east side
of the city in existing and future developments. And in light of that:
• The Council shall develop a strategy proposal for the train pathway that connects Renmore
and the Train Station/City Centre, as well the surrounding areas, as a proper movement
corridor for residents.
• Such a strategy should plan and assess infrastructure, environmental, and anti-social needs
with consultation with residents and interested bodies.
Not considered.
NOM 31/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 17th June 2019
That GCC calls on the Government to commit to:
Greater urgency in setting up the Judicial Council to review levels of awards for personal injuries.
Awards for soft tissue injuries must be brought down significantly in line with international norms.
A zero tolerance approach to fraud with the setting up of a dedicated central Gardai resource
specifically tasked with investigating fraudulent cases for potential prosecution.
Not considered.
NOM 32/2019 Notice given by: Cllr. Colette Connolly
Date Received: 17th June 2019
That GCC calls on the Government to ensure that the National Minimum Wage (Protection of
Employee Tips) Bill 2017 is enacted as a matter of priority.
Not considered.
6. QUESTIONS
None
CORRESPONDENCE
7.
a) Seminar notice - Midlands Regional Transition Team in conjunction with the Eastern &
Midlands CARO & Local Enterprise Office Offaly. Not considered.
b) Correspondence received from Gearåid Ö Conluain, National University of Ireland,
Galway — copy attached. Not considered.
IO I Page
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
8.
a) National Day of Commemoration, Sunday 14th July 2019. Not considered.
b) 6th Festival of History — 31st La Touche Legacy Weekend, 13th & 14th September
2019. Not considered
11.
None
12.
None
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Mi
s, C nfirmed & Signed
Mayor of Galway
Ill Page
