Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 25th March 2019
at 5.00pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, P.
Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P.
Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T.
O'Flaherty, and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
N/A
As per Standing Orders, the meting commenced following a moment of Silent Reflection. '
Item I(a) Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund (LSSIF)
The Mayor welcomed Members and reminded them that this Special Meeting was called as a single
item meeting of one hour's duration to consider the Large Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund proposals
previously made to members.
The Chief Executive circulated a brief report which outlined that, as requested at the March Ordinary
Meeting regarding the LSSIF process, he made contact with the Department of Tourism, Transport and
Sport regarding the criteria required to be satisfied in relation to an application or applications from a
Local Authority to the fund. He clarified that, as per Paragraph IO of the guidance document previously
circulated, that should a Local Authority wish to make more than one application then the Local
Authority must rank the applications "in order of merit." Any decision regarding the prioritisation of
projects rests with the local authority.
A discussion on the merits of the proposed applications and the recommendation process ensued.
The Mayor and each of the Members contributed to the discussion. The Chief Executive provided,
inter alia, further clarifications of the process as requested.
At 6.00pm, Cllr Lyons proposed, seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, to extend the meeting until the end of
the discussion. This was agreed unanimously.
At 6.05 pm, it was unanimously agreed to adjourn the meeting for 5 minutes to allow consideration
of options.
At 6.12pm, the meeting recommenced.
The Mayor moved the meeting towards the consideration of a series of motions tabled in relation to
Item 2(c) on the agenda of the Ordinary Meeting of 11th March:
bsngi?, b
I Pagel
Proposed by: Cllr. P. Keane
Seconded by: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
(Deferred from 11 March)
That Galway City Council endorses equally the Projects at the Connacht Rugby Redevelopment at
the sportsground and the proposed additional development at Cappagh Park and Galway City
Council calls on the Dept of Transport, Tourism and Sport to recognise the immense contribution
which both projects would make to the Region.
Withdrawn
Proposed by: Cllr. M. J. Crowe
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Farrell
(Deferred from 11 March)
In the context of Stream 1 Funding under the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund that Galway
City Council endorses on an equal basis the proposed projects at Merlin Woods Sports and
Recreation Campus and the Dyke Road Rowing Centre project and GCC calls on the Department of
Tourism, Transport and Sport to look favourably on the applications by virtue of the immense
social dividend that each project will deliver to Galway City and the region.
Withdrawn
Proposed by: Cllr. M. Crowe
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that Connacht Rugby be the prioritised number one position in LSSIF and the Galway
Aqua Sports Centre at Cappagh be number two.
Agreed Unanimously
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded by: Cllr. M. Farrell
I propose that Merlin Woods Sports and Recreation Campus be this Council's prioritised project
under Stream 1 of the application for LSSIF development ( number 3 overall)and the rowing
project be the second choice (number 4 overall)
Amendment proposed by Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron
I propose that the proposed Rowing Facility at Dyke Road be the Council's Prioritised project
under Stream 1 of the LSSIF (number 3 overall) and that the Merlin Woods Sports and Recreation
Campus be second priority under Stream 1 (number 4 overall)
Following an equity of votes, the Mayor cast his second vote in favour of the amendment.
The amended motion, having been carried, then became the substantive motion and was put to
a vote.
The motion was carried with 11 in favour, 6 against and 1 abstention.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded by: Cllr. D. Lyons
I propose that Galway City Council welcomes the introduction of the LSSIF Scheme by Minister
Ross and acknowledging the significant interest and worthwhile projects which deserve support
which have emerged in Galway City and request that Minister Ross approach the Minister for
Finance to allocate substantial additional funding towards the LSSIF over the life of the scheme.
Agreed Unanimously
The meeting concluded at 6.30pm.
Page 2
Minutes, Confirmed & Signed
Mayor of Galwq