Presiding_;
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of the Annual Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Friday 26th June, 2019
at 4.00pm in Leisureland, Salthill, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: l. Byrne, A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, N. Murphy, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty
B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr.
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr.
B. Barrett, A/ Director of Services
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Mr.
Ms. F. Kearney, Information Officer
. E. Finan, Staff Officer
Ms
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Ms.
S. Healy, Graduate
Mr.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in line with
Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
The Meetings Administrator advised Members of Standing Order 22, which prohibits unauthorised
recordings without appropriate Members' approval. The Meetings Administrator requested the
agreement of Members to suspend Standing Order 22 for the Annual Meeting to allow the taking of
photographs. This was agreed.
Item 1 - Election of Mayor
Cllr. M. Cubbard called for Nominations for the Position of Mayor of Galway City.
Cllr. M. Cubbard was proposed by Cllr. N. Larkin, and seconded by Cllr. N. McNellis.
Cllr. N. Larkin spoke in favour of his proposal and outlined the qualities, capabilities and experience of Cllr.
M. Cubbard and the unfortunate impact Covid-19 had on his term as Mayor in 2020. His term as Mayor
showed his true potential and he would continue to show leadership and deliver as Mayor of Galway City.
No other nomination was received.
The Meetings Administrator advised Members that as per s. 37(b) of the Local Government Act 2001 that
as there is only one candidate nominated that candidate shall be elected.
Minut s, o
Signa
ayor of Galway
Cllr. M. Cubbard was formally elected Mayor of Galway. He proceeded to take the Chair for the remainder
of the meeting.
On taking the Chair, Mayor Cubbard thanked Cllr. N. Larkin and Cllr. N. McNellis for their nomination.
Mayor Cubbard stated that this was a personal achievement for him being elected as Mayor for a
consecutive year and that it was the first time since 1966/67 when it last happened. He thanked colleagues
in the council for their support. He also thanked the Chief Executive, the Senior Management Team, and
staff from the Mayoral Office and Corporate Service staff in particular for their support the last year.
Mayor Cubbard acknowledged all who lost their lives due to Covid-19, all who have battled Covid-19 and
the impact on business. He wishes to work and focus on building the local economy and on making Galway
the number one tourist destination. He will also be continuing work on supporting housing and safety
measures on the River Corrib, the accessibility of playgrounds and parks and deliver on sporting facilities.
He concluded by thanking the outgoing Deputy Mayor Cllr. D. Lyons and his family for his guidance and
advice during the year, his parents and family, his employer O'Leary insurance and his wife and children.
Councillors congratulated the Mayor on his election, and wished him well as Mayor for the year ahead.
The Chief Executive, also congratulated the Mayor on his re-election and offered his continued support
and that of the staff of the city council for the year ahead.
2. Election of Deputy Mayor
The Mayor invited nominations for the position of Deputy Mayor of Galway City.
Cllr. C. Connolly was proposed by Cllr. M. O'Connor, and seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
No other nomination was received.
The Meetings Administrator declared Cllr. C. Connolly elected as Deputy Mayor.
Cllr. C. Connolly thanked Cllr. M. O'Connor and Cllr. T. O'Flaherty for their nominations.
The Councillor congratulated the Deputy Mayor on her election as Deputy Mayor. The Chief Executive
also congratulated the Deputy Mayor on her election.
Item 3 - Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
(a) Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd (IPB)
Appointment of One (1) Member (for a period of one year).
(Non Group — Appointment by Vote.)
Nominations
Cllr. D. McDonnell was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin.
Mayor Cubbard deemed Cllr. D. McDonnell elected.
(b) Galway Civic Trust
ppointmentof (for a period of one year)
21 Page
(Non Group —Appointment by Vote.)
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed to defer Item 3 (b) until the restructuring of Galway Civic Trust was completed.
This was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
All agreed.
Item 4. Appointment of Chairperson to the Climate Action, Environment, Recreation
and Amenity Strategic Policy Committees (SPC)
Nominations
I. Cllr. M. O'Connor was proposed by Cllr. N. Murphy and seconded by the Cllr. C. Connolly.
No further nomination was received.
Cllr. M. O'Connor was elected Chair of the SPC
Item 5. To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
The Chief Executive advised Members that the practice has been that Ordinary Meetings are held on the
second Monday of each month, except for the month of August.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that meetings take place at 3.00pm on the second Monday of each month,
excluding August 2020.
13th July, 2020
14th September, 2020
12th October, 2020
9th November, 2020
14th December, 2020
11th January, 2021
8th February, 2021
8th March, 2021
12th April, 2021
10th May, 2021
14th June, 2021
The motion was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and all agreed.
The Meetings Administrator requested Members to remain in the Chamber for a photograph of the new
Council, as a robed body.
The Meeting concluded at 4.52pm.
31 Page
