Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 27th January, 2020
at 10.00am in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. M. Cubbard Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: A. Cheevers, C. Connolly, J. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, F. Fahy, O.
Hanley, C. Higgins, E. Hoare, P. Keane, N. Larkin, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N.
McNelis, M. O' Connor, T. O' Flaherty and P. O' Reilly.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Ms. P. Philbin, Chief Executive, Galway 2020
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllr. M. O' Connor
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their consideration.
The Mayor commenced the meeting at 10.00am by welcoming Members. The Chief Executive outlined some
of the events from the Galway 2020 bid book.
Cllr. P. Keane queried if the Chief Executive & Mayor should take part in the discussion citing a possible
conflict of interest as Members of the Board of Galway 2020. It was proposed by Cllr. P Keane & seconded
by Cllr. C. Connolly to adjourn the meeting to allow the Meetings Administrator get clarity on the matter.
This was agreed.
The meeting adjourned at 10.18am & re-commenced at 10.36am.
The Meetings Administrator referred to Section 175 of the Local Government Act 2001 & the Code of Conduct
for Councillors. The Meetings Administrator advised as a precautionary measure, that a potential conflict of
interest might arise, and that the Mayor might consider his participation in the discussion and decision (if
any) around funding for Galway 2020. The Mayor was advised of the potential for a conflict of interest. The
Chief Executive is permitted to take part in the discussion as he would not be taking part in any vote. At
10.38am the Mayor excused himself from the chair & Cllr. D. Lyons proceeded to chair the meeting.
Cllr. C. Connolly requested it be placed on record her objection to the timing of the request for a Special
Meeting.
Queries & concerns from the Elected Members included: requirement for openness & transparency; private
sponsorship not forthcoming; more involvement from business community; benefit-in-kind; advertising
resources of Galway City-Council; funding from Galway County Council; department oversight; financial
reports from Galway 2020to EleQ8å'Members.
The Chief Executive MSÆPhilbin answered queries raised & advised of figures. The Deputy Mayor invited
clarification and questions.
Clarifications & comments from the Elected Members included: no financial reports before members; council
considered as subsidising Galway 2020.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed a motion to allocate €2.5m to Galway 2020 & €80k to Druid which was seconded
by Cllr. N. McNelis. This was subsequently withdrawn.
Cllr. P. O'Reilly proposed a Motion, which was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly, The Deputy Mayor proceeded
to take a vote on the Motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. P. O'Reilly Seconded by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Defer decision on additional funding for Galway 2020 until detailed financial reports have been received
with adequate time for Councillors to review same and to be taken as the first item at the February
meeting.
In favour: 14 Against: 1 Abstain: O
The Motion was passed.
Present: 15
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed a Motion which was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. The Deputy Mayor proceeded
to take a vote on the Motion.
Proposed by: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded by: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
A letter of congratulations issue to David McRedmond, C.E.O., An Post for coming to Galway for the
unveiling of a set of two colourful new stamps marking the national designation of Galway and Rijeka
as European Capitals of Culture 2020, in a joint stamp issue with Croatia Post
In favour: 14 Against: O Abstain: 1
Present: 15
The Motion was assed.
The Meeting concluded at 12.25pm.
Min
21 Page
Confi
d & igned
Mayor of Galway