Presidin :
Present:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council,
held on Monday 28B' April, 2014
at 3.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. P. Conneely, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Councillors: B. Cameron; Catherine Connolly; Colette Connolly; T. Costello;
M.J. Crowe; O. Crowe; F. Fahy; P. Keane; D. Lyons; D. McDonnell; N.
McNelis; M. Murphy; N. Nolan and T. O'Flaherty.
Mr. B. McGrath, City Manager,
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance,
Mr. B. Dunne, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner,
Ms. S. Connolly, Senior Engineer,
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner,
Mr. L Blake, Senior Executive Planner,
Mr. J. Molloy, Senior Executive Engineer,
Mr. B. Burke, Executive Engineer,
Mr. J. Harrold, Arts Officer,
Ms. S. Carroll, Environmental Education Officer,
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
At the outset of the meeting it was proposed by the Mayor to conclude the meeting at
6.00pm. This was agreed.
CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th
March, 2014.
On the proposal of Cllr. Colette Connolly, seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons, the minutes were agreed.
Cllr Cameron wished it clarified that his Motion 05/14 regarding dished pavements had been dealt
with inter alia under the Barcelona Declaration. Similarly, Cllr. Lyons wished it clarified that the
Western Distributor Road was included within the same item.
Other issues raised by members and responded to by officials included illegal parking including in
spaces reserved for disabled drivers; South Park; works on the Promenade; the Séilin extension
and Leisureland.
Under Standing Order 22 — Urgent Business, the following were taken without debate:
1
"That this Council requests the City Manager not to undertake any further steps following the
receipt of expressions of interest as advertised to the operation and management of the Ballinfoile
Community Centre and in particular not to take any steps in relation to putting the matter out to
tender pending full consultation with Community Groups/Stakeholders and a full report placed
before the Council members for a full debate"
Cllr. Conneely
Proposer:
Cllr. O. Crowe
Seconder;
't That this Council request the City Manager to undertake not to take any further steps following
the receipt of all expressions of interest as advertised in relation to the operation and
management of the Community Centre at the Cappagh Park and in particular not to take any steps
in relation to putting the matter out to tender pending a full report and debate by the elected
members and following comprehensive consultation with all interested community groups and
organisations and that the matter be put on the Council agenda for full debate and consideration
prior to any further steps being taken"
Catherine Connolly
Proposer:
Cllrs. Lyons, Keane, Murphy, Nolan, Cameron, McNelis, MJ Crowe, Costello,
Seconder:
McDonnell, Conneely, Colette Connolly
Both Motions were agreed unanimously.
(b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 24th
March, 2014.
On the proposal of Cllr. Catherine Connolly, seconded by Cllr. Cameron, the minutes were agreed.
Arising from the minutes, the status of the former Airport site was raised and in response the City
Manager advised members that that there were three outstanding issues regarding the transfer of
ownership which would be resolved within weeks. He advised that air activities would continue in
the medium term within the parameters of an appropriate license and following the transfer of
ownership the City and County Councils will commission a scooping report regarding future,
possible uses for the site. The City manager will keep the members informed of developments.
(c) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 14th
April, 2014.
On the proposal of Cllr Lyons, seconded by Cllr McDonnell, the minutes were agreed.
The motion regarding the prohibition of circuses which feature live animals was raised. Following
discussion, it was agreed to leave the motion on the agenda. The issue of a weight restriction on
the Wolfe Tone Bridge was raised and the acting Director of Services outlined the monitoring and
analysis programme which is currently in place.
2
2.
(a)
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Part XI Planning & Development Act 2000 to 2011 and Part VIII Planning &
Development Regulations 2001 to 2012 and in accordance with the
requirements of Section 179(3) b of the Planning and Development Act
2000-2010.
LA 7/2013 — Proposed improvement measures on the Lough Atalia Road.
"Galway City Council hereby gives notice of its intention for proposed improvement measures on
Lough Atalia Road. The improvement measures are proposed to cater for the safer movement of
large vehicles under the Lough Atalia Bridge and will consist of the following: Regrading and
realignment of the road running under the Lough Atalia railway bridge, the provision of
appropriate pedestrian and cyclist accommodation on each side of the roadway over a distance of
180m. The provision of a storm water drainage network system including an attenuation tank and
pumping station and rising main within the roadway, in the Townland of Townparks East. The
pumped storm water outfall line total length of approximately 835m to discharge at the Galway
Harbour Enterprise Park at Renmore. In addition, it has been determined following screening for
Appropriate Assessment under Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive, that an Appropriate
Assessment (AA) is not required."
The acting Director of Services for Planning & Transportation stepped through the report
previously circulated. He advised that in consultation locally at an event held in the Harbour Hotel
the consensus which emerged was in favour of Oprion 3.
In lengthy discussion which followed, Members raised a range of issues which were addressed by
Mr Dunne and by the City Manager. These included issues to do with the attenuation tank; contact
with the Harbour Compnmay; contact with the emergency services; available funding; the duration
of proposed works; the impact on traffic and on bridges and landscaping works.
It having reached 6.00pm when members had agreed to extend the meeting to deal with with
following: Item 2(b), 3(a), 3(b) and 4(h), it was further agreed to consider two Motions submitted
under Standing Order 22 and finish.
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, the adoption of the Part VIII proposal as
outlined above.
The following amendment was proposed by Cllr. Keane, seconded by Cllr. Lyons:
"That the Part VIII Planning Application in respect of the proposed improvement measures on the
Lough Atalia Road proceed as per the Planner's Report strictly subject to the project proceeding on
a 24 hour per day, 7 day a week basis so as to minimise the impact on commuters and businesses
and residences in the area".
Mr. Dunne, A/Director of Services advised Councillors that due to Environmental legislation it
would not be possible to comply with this proposal, following this advice Cllr. Keane withdrew his
amendment.
3
The following amendment was proposed by Cllr. Cameron, seconded by Cllrs. Nolan, McNelis,
Colette Connolly, Costello and Catherine Connolly.
"We propose a slight relocation of the proposed attenuation tank ans associated drainage works to
the southern edge of the road on the lands owned by the Harbour Company after all appropriate
assessments are carried out".
The Mayor called for a vote to be taken on the amendment which resulted as follows:
In Favour:
5
8
Against:
Abstain:
2
The Mayor declared the proposal defeated and called for a vote to be taken on the substantive
motion proposed by Cllr. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe which resulted as follows:
In Favour: 10
5
Against:
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
The following motions were then proposed by Councillors.
Motion 1:
The following was proposed by Cllr. Costello, seconded by Cllrs. Catherine Connolly, Cameron,
Nolan, McNelis, Colette Connolly:
"For Health and Safety reasons and given the facts as outlined by City Management, that all
necessary steps and precautionary measures be taken as a matter of urgency pending permanent
improvement measures including the exploration of restricting lorry height"
The Mayor called for a vote to be taken on this proposal which resulted as follows:
In Favour: 14
Against:
1
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
Motion 2:
The following was proposed by Cllr. Colette Connolly, seconded by Cllr. Nolan:
"That Galway City Council requests the Department of Transport to introduce (in view of eight
serious strikes against the bridge) a further reduction in the lorry height restriction passing through
Lough Atalia Bridge".
In Favour: 11
Against:
3
4
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
Motion 3:
The following was proposed by Cllr. Colette Connolly, seconded by Cllr. Nolan:
"That this Council requests the Galway Harbour Board to consider allowing permission for the
attenuation tanks necessary for lowering road on Lough Atalia Part VIII LA7/2013 as a matter of
urgency".
Cllr. Ollie Crowe advised the meeting that as a member of Galway Harbour Board he could not
participate in this proposal.
The Mayor called for a vote to be taken which resulted as follows:
In Favour: 12
Against:
Abstain:
1
The Mayor declared the motion carried.
(b) Annual Financial Statement Unaudited for year ending December 2013
On the proposition of Cllr. Lyons seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, the Council agreed the adoption of
the Annual Financial Statement 2013 and the over-expenditure as set out on note 17 on page 23.
3.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Galway City Council Arts Grants 2014
It was proposed by Cllr. M.J. Crowe that Standing Orders be suspended and each Councillors be
allocated one minute to raise points relating the allocation of Arts Grants Funding.
This was agreed.
It was proposed by Cllr. T. Costello, seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis, to adopt Galway City Council's
Arts Grants 2014 as presented in the report from Mr. O'Neill, Director of Services dated 9th April,
2014 with the following amendments:
That €100.00 be taken from Moonfish, €50.00 from Galway Dance Project and €50.00 from Galway
Theatre Festival and that €200.00 be allocated to Ala to bring its allocation back up to the 2013
allocation.
This was agreed and the Mayor declared the motion carried.
(b) Marketing and Promotions Fund 2014
It was proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. Keane and agreed to adopt the
recommendations for funding under the Marketing and Promotions Fund 2014 from the Corporate
5
Policy Group as presented in the report from Mr. O'Neill, Director of Services dated 28th April,
2014".
The Mayor declared the Motion carried.
4.
(a)
(e)
(h)
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Local Government Re}orm Act 2014
Deferred
Land Aggregation Scheme
Deferred
Irish Water
Deferred
Regional Cities Bike Share Scheme — Report Already Circulated
Deferred
Labour Activation Scheme
Deferred
Replica Sculpture of Padraic Ö Conaire - Report Already Circulated
Deferred
UNESCO City of Film — Report Already Circulated
Deferred
Responsible Dog Ownership
Dr. Sharon Carroll, Enviromental Education Officer briefly outlined the campaign to be launched in
relation to responsible dog ownership and the measures to be put in place regarding dog fouling.
The campaign was welcomed enthusiastically by members and on the proposal of Cllr. O'Flaherty,
seconded by Cllr. Murphy, the members agreed to endorse the campaign.
(i) Quarterly Reports — Quarter Ending March, 2014
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Housing
Environment
Arts and Culture
Transport, Infrastructure, Recreation & Amenity
Finance
As the Quarterly reports for the Quarter Ending 31st March 2014 were not discussed they were
deferred to the next Ordinary Meeting of the Council.
6
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
NOTICE OF MOTIONS:
Deferred.
QUESTIONS
Response issued to question placed on the agenda by Cllr. Nolan and Cllr. Fahy were
responded to.
CORRESPONDENCE:
For Councillors' information - circulated
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION
None.
CONFERENCES
On the proposal of Cllr. Catherine Connolly seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty the conferences list as set
out on the agenda and circulated to members was agreed.
10. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy
Votes of Sympathy were unanimously agreed to the families of the following who are recently
deceased:
Mr. B. Mannion (RIP)
Mr. C. Powell (RIP)
Ms. M. Fitzpatrick (RIP)
Mr. H. Haverty (RIP)
Mr. B. spital (RIP)
Ms. P. Kennelly (RIP)
Mr. J. Moloney (RIP)
Mr. A. O'Dea (RIP)
Ms. M. Mullins (RIP)
Mr. M. O'Connell (RIP)
Ms. B. Kelly (RIP)
Ms. M. Purcell (RIP)
Ms. M. Considine (RIP)
Ms. J. Walsh (RIP)
Mrs. P. Malone (RIP)
Ms. M.R. O'Donnell (RIP)
7
Mrs. B. Egan (RIP)
Ms. B. Jones (RIP)
Mrs. B. Weatherly (RIP)
11.
12.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
None.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The City Manager made a suggestion that following the Annual Meeting to be held
on 6th June at 6.00pm and prior to the first Ordinary Meeting of the new City Council
that a workshop be held at which all Elected Members and the Senior Management
team could work to identify strategic priorities for the new council for the coming
year and to discuss ways of working into the future. He suggested a date of 16th June
for that workshop.
Elected members, both on behalf of their parties and individually, paid fulsome
tribute to Councillor Tom Costello whose last meeting after 23 years this was. They
acknowledged his qualities as a public representatives and his significant
contribution to public life in the city. His term as Mayor was recalled and his rapport
with staff noted. The City Manager joined in wishing Cllr. Costello well in his
retirement. The Members and those others present rose in a standing ovation for
Cllr Costello.
In response, Cllr Costello thanked his colleagues for their kind words and referred to
the fantastic memories he would take from his time as a Councillor and as Mayor.
He wished the Councillors and the City Manager every success for the future.
The meeting concluded at 7.00pm
8