Presidin :
Present;
In Attendance:
bsent:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council,
held on Monday 30th June 2014
at 4.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. D. Lyons, Mayor of the City of Galway.
Cllrs. C. 6. Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, C.
Crowe, M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, A. Marley, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flahert
and J. Walsh
. B. McGrath, City Manager,
Mr
J. O'Neill, Director of Services,
Mr.
T. Connell, Director of Services,
E. McCormack, Head of Finance,
Ms.
B. Dunne, A/Director of Services,
Mr.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator,
Mr.
P. Philbin, A/Senior Executive Officer,
K. Lohan, Clerical Officer.
Ms.
Cllr.
B. Cameron.
• Presentation from Ireland West Airport, Knock
Mr. Joe Gilmore, Managing Director of Ireland West Airport, Knock, stepped
through a presentation on the role of Ireland West Airport in driving tourism and
economic development in the West of Ireland. He outlined the background to
the airport's development; its passenger and network growth; its contribution to
the Galway area; future partnerships with the regional and local authorities. He
pointed out the key role the airport will play in the development of Galway. He
suggested the approach which the airport wished to take with the regional
authorities in an investment and partnership approach.
In response, the Mayor and Members thanked Mr. Gilmore for his presentation
and raised a number of issues and questions. These included identifying sources
of future funding; existing and future routes from the airport including to Eastern
Europe; expansion of the runway; and possible over-dependence on a single
carrier.
Mr Gilmore responded to Members' queries and introduced his colleague Mr.
Brendan Flanagan and board member Mr. Martin Gillen who elaborated further
on the potential future development of airport and its impact on the city of
Galway.
1
Cllr. Keane proposed, seconded by Cllr. M.J. Crowe, the following motion:
"That Galway City Council joins with its sister Authorities in the Connaught region to
examine possible investment opportunities in Ireland West Airport Knock in order to
identify and develop Tourism opportunities for Galway City and beyond"
This was agreed unanimously and the Mayor declared the motion carried.
CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES
1.
Cllr. M.J. Crowe presented a request under Standing Order 4, signed by 7 Members
for a special meeting to be held on 14th July:
Cllr. M.J. Crowe under Standing Order Number 4
"Proposer:
Cllrs. Farrell, Conchüir, Marley, Keane, O. Crowe, Connolly
Seconders:
"The undersigned members request that a Special Meeting be held on Monday 14th
July 2014 at 4.00pm with the following agenda:
1.
2.
3.
4.
A full public update on Leisureland
A briefing on the LPT and the implications of proposed changes to same
Minutes of the Ordinary meeting 16th June and Ordinary Meeting 30th June
Any Other Business"
(At a later stage of the meeting, at the request of the Mayor, the date was amended
to 215t July.)
2.
BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
To appoint members to the Local Community Development
Committee (LCDC)
Recommendation from Corporate Policy Group
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty, the appointment of
Councillors Lyons and Conneely to the LCDC.
Cllr. Farrell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Ö Conchür, the appointment of Cllr.
Marley to the LCDC.
A discussion followed and issues regarding gender balance and the guidelines
regarding appointments were raised.
The Mayor called a vote. On the nomination of Cllr. Marley, 7 members voted
in favour and IO against. On the nomination of Councillors Lyons and
Conneely, IO members voted in favour, 6 against and 1 abstained.
The Mayor deemed Councillors Lyons and Conneely elected.
On the proposal of Cllr. Flannery, seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty, Ms Breda Fox,
Local Enterprise Officer, was unanimously selected to sit on the LCDC.
2
(b)
3.
4.
Appointment of members to Galway City Council Audit
Committee
Recommendation from Corporate Policy Group:
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, advised that the recommendation from
the CPG was that Councillors O. Crowe and Cubbard be nominated to sit on
the Audit Committee. Cllr Crowe withdrew his name and proposed, seconded
by Cllr. Marley, the nomination of Cllr. Farrell.
Cllr. Conneely proposed, seconded by Cllr. Flannery, the nomination of Cllr.
Cubbard.
The nominations were agreed unanimously.
Cllr. McDonnell proposed, seconded by Cllr. Conneely, the nomination of Ms
M. Dooley, Mr. P. Ryan and Mr. S. Bree to continue as the external
representatives on the Audit Committee. The nominations were agreed
unanimously.
Approval for Section 83 Agreement Under Local Government Act 2001
between Westmeath County Council & Galway City Council to develop a
cycleway within the administrative area of Galway City Council.
Mr. B. Dunne, acting Director of Services, apologised to Members for the
lateness in notice on this item but requested their approval to make a Section
83 Agreement under the Local Government Act 2001 between Westmeath
County Council & Galway City Council to develop a cycleway within the
administrative area of Galway City Council.
Cllr. Connolly proposed, seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, the approval of the
agreement. This was agreed unanimously.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
(a) Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme
Mr. J. O'Neill, Director of Services, advised Members of the
recommendation from the CPG to put the Draft SPC on public display.
On the proposal of Cllr. McNelis, seconded by Cllr. Connolly, it was agreed
to place the Draft SPC scheme on display.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(b)
Finance Report
Noted
Amenity Grants 2014
Agreed
3
European Capital of Culture 2020
(c)
Dr. P. Collins, of NUI, Galway outlined to Members the process underway to secure
the designation of European Capital of Culture 2020 and the role of the team he is
leading from NUIG who had successfully tendered to prepare the bid. He outlined
the opportunity whic\h ECOC 2020 offered to the city and region, the critical success
factors; some reflections on Galway's failure to secure the 2005 designation; the
process of public and stakeholder engagement which will be undertaken; the
timeframe involved in the bid; the importance of 'legacV to a successful bid; the
benefits likely to social and community cohesion and the economic and tourism
impacts.
The Chief Executive outlined for Members the structures he has put in place with a
high-level Steering Group, an Advisory Group of artists and cultural practitioners and
an internal project group. He advised that there will be full reporting back to the
Council through the SPC and at Council meetings.
Members welcomed the appointment of NUI, Galway to prepare the bid and wished
Dr. Collins and his team every success. Some issues were raised including the
position and use of the Irish language; the geographical extent of the region referred
to by Dr. Collins; the forms that a legacy might take and the funding available and
financing needed for both the bid and the year itself.
Dr Collins assured Members that he and his team had noted the issues raised and
that they would be considered in the process.
Cllr. Flannery proposed, seconded by Cllr. Walsh, the following motion:
"That Galway City Council unequivocally supports the city's bid to become European
Capital of Culture in 2020 and that it also supports our representatives from NUIG
with developing a bid to secure this status"
This was agreed and the Mayor declared the motion carried.
(d) Shared Services with Galway County Council (City & County
Library Services)
Mr. P. Rabbitt, acting City & County Librarian, stepped through a presentation to
Members outlining the extent of the library service which is a shared service
between Galway County and City councils. He presented statistics demonstrating
both the range of library services available and the levels of use in both the county
and across the city branches.
He outlined the 4 key priorities for library development in Galway:
1. The library as a hub of the community;
4
2. Making the most of digital technology and creative media;
3. Ensure that the libraries are resilient and sustainable;
4. Deliver the right skills for those who work in the libraries.
In discussion which followed, Members welcomed the presentation and expressed
the hope that it would be a regular feature to hear from the Library Service. Issues
raised included concern about opening hours; the need for a new library
headquarters and the rent paid for the City Library premises; the opportunities to
engage with children and teenagers; the budget for the entire service and Galway
Citrs contribution.
In response, Mr Rabbitt and the Chief Executive provided clarification on a number
of points. The Chief Executive emphasised the need for a new, modern, fit-for-
purpose library headquarters. He further elaborated that currently the City Council
contributes €1.584 million to the service and this is set to rise to €1.726 million next
year.
(e) Shared Services with Galway County Council (City & County Fire
Service)
Mr. M. Raftery, acting Director of Services, Galway County Council, stepped
through a presentation to Members outlining the extent of the Fire Services
provided as a shared service by Galway County and City councils and its
development as a fire and rescue service. He outlined the background to the
shared service; the costs associated with the service and the range of services
provided to the city and county from its headquarters in Fr. Grffin Road. He
went on to outline the financial and other implications of the current
"Keeping Communities Safe" national policy framework and the
responsibilities around major emergency management planning. He
emphasised, in conclusion, the increased financial support required from
both Councils over the coming years to implement KCS and the Fire Service's
Strategic Plan.
Having reached 7.30pm, an extension of time to 8.00pm was proposed and
Members welcomed Mr. Raftery to the Chamber and thanked him for his
presentation. Several conveyed their gratitude and admiration to the staff of
the Fire and Rescue service for the commitment and dedication to their work.
Issues raised included the future of Fr. Griffin Road station; the previously
proposed station for the east side of the city; a new station to cover South
Connemara; the charges associated with the fire service including fire safety
certificates, cap-outs for house fires and road traffic accidents.
5
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Mr. Raftery, in response, clarified a number of points including the operating
structure of the service; the approximate amounts outstanding of between
€1m and €1.5m of unpaid charges and the progress on the station for
Connemara.
The Chief Executive elaborated on the costs to Galway City Council associated
with the service which currently stand at €4,228,000 in 2014 and are set to
rise to the region of €4,800,000 with the roll-out of Keeping Communities
Safe. He also expressed his intention to progress the appropriate branding of
the Fire & Rescue Service (and the Library Service) as jointly funded by both
local authorities.
UNESCO City of Film
Deferred
Acquisition of lands from Galway Corrib Airport Ltd. -
Deferred
Update on Gateway Initiative
Deferred
NOTICE OF MOTIONS:
Deferred.
QUESTIONS
None.
CORRESPONDENCE:
For Councillors' information - circulated
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS INFORMATION
For Councillors information - circulated
CONFERENCES
The conference book was circulated to Council.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS
None.
6
11.
12.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING
THE MEETING
None.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Motion under Standing Order 22 (to be taken without debate.)
Cllr. O'Flaherty proposed, seconded and supported by the signatures of Cllrs. Lyons,
Conneely, Walsh, Cubbard, Fahy, Connolly, O. Crowe and Keane the following
motion under Standing Order 22:
"l call on this council to erect signs particularly on the City beaches and Parks
advising dog owners of their responsibilities in respect of dog fouling. These signs
should be erected without delay".
This was agreed unanimously and the Mayor declared the motion carried.
Special Meeting Called Under Standing Order 4:
Following a request from the Mayor, the proposers of the Special Meeting called
Under Standing Order 4 agreed to the holding of the meeting on Monday, 21st July at
4.00pm.
The meeting adjourned.
UAYOR
7
"GNED
l.