Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 23rd April, 2018 at 2.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, O. Crowe, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane,
N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, N. McNelis and J. Walsh.
Mr. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive,
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Mr. A. Jones, Senior Executive Officer,
Mr. T. Prendergast, A/Senior Engineer,
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
C. 6' Conchüir, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. M. Cubbard, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Cllr.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mayor Flannery advised that the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath was unable to attend the
meeting and proposed the following order of business:
To defer Items I(a),(b), 2(a) and 3(a) to 3(i) inclusive and start the meeting with
Items 3(j) & 3(k):
Overview of General Data Protection Regulations;
Galway City Council Current Usage of Closed Circuit TV (CCTV).
The running order was agreed.
3.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(j) Overview of General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR)
Mr. A. Jones presented to the Meeting. He outlined GDPR legislation is relevant to the EU
Charter of Fundamental Rights which includes the right to privacy; EU Regulations regarding
GDPR and Law Enforcement Directive; the Data Protection Bill 2018 which covers sections of
interest including Section 45: Processing of Personal data revealing political opinion for
electoral activities, Section 55: Direct marketing for purposes of Article 21, Section 56:
Restriction on right to object for election purposes and Schedule 2 Section (10)(5)(D)
1
membership of commission. Mr. Jones outlined the eight principles of data protection in
detail and provided some useful links to Councillors for further information.
Councillors raised questions and sought clarification including if there were nominated
contacts in each Department, software, use of e-mail, the right of access to your own personal
information, training for Councillors, voluntary housing option and data transferred to
voluntary bodies, request for mobile phones for full time use, request for CE Orders to be
available at Council meetings, Freedom of Information; back up for files/data and the threat
of loss of information.
Mr. Jones confirmed that funding was available to provide a robust GDPR compliant 365 office
and e-mail system and invited suggestions for the new e-mail domain name. It was clarified
that Councillors bona fides when making representations on an individual's behalf would be
accepted by City Council staff, as appropriate. It was confirmed following clarification that
Chief Executive's Orders will be available for inspection by Councillors at future Council
meetings. It was confirmed that new e-mails could be advertised in a local newspaper and old
e-mail addresses could be still active for a period and re-directed to the new e-mail domain.
A discussion was held regarding access to City Hall offices and to Yeats's college building and
a number of Councillors requested access for all Councillors to all offices. Dignity at Work and
Codes of Conduct were referred to with respect requested from all staff in City Hall towards
Councillors.
Mr. A. Jones advised that the City Council operates a clean desk guidelines and confirmed his
availability for questions from Councillors.
Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly
'That Galway City Council recommend to Government that the digital age of consent be 16
and that this motion be circulated to all other Local Authorities'.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
This motion was passed.
(k) Galway City Council Current Usage of Closed Circuit TV (CCTV)
Mr. A. Jones informed the Meeting of the various CCTV systems in use by Galway City Council
and the purposes for same which include preventing anti-social behaviour and crime;
protecting the wellbeing of the public and staff; improving the delivery of services (traffic
management); protecting assets and property of Galway City Council; litter management and
CCTV footage provided to An Garda Siochåna to assist in the investigation of crimes. He
outlined the cost factors associated with CCTV; the locations of systems; capital costs for the
last three years and 2017 service costs which amounted to €191,016.
Councillors discussed the benefits and the negatives of CCTV. Councillors raised a number of
queries and clarifications including camera at Ballinfoile Park Western Distributor Road bring
2
banks and Carn Ard estate; 2017 funding for CCTV at Westside running tracks; query if systems
managed inhouse or outsourced; potential displacement of crime; retention of data;
vandalism of windows at Galway City Council Museum, query regarding fragility of cameras;
whether persons were named and shamed in newspapers for litter offences and a request for
a policy document on CCTV.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a)
(b)
2.
(a)
3.
(a)
(b)
(d)
(f)
(h)
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 5th March
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Tuesday 27th March
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
The Minutes were agreed and adopted.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 8th March 2018
Deferred.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Consideration of National Planning Framework
Deferred.
Consideration of National Development Plan 2018 - 2027
Deferred.
Chief Executive's Report for April 2018
Deferred.
Report on Christmas Market 2017
Deferred.
Update Report on the Dyke Road Site / Cultural Infrastructure Provision
Deferred.
Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014 - 2016
Deferred.
Final IBAL Anti-Litter Survey Results for 2017
Deferred.
Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements
in Galway
Deferred.
3
BREXIT
(i) Impacts / Preparation / Planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government;
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from Brexit;
(iii) The view form Irish Local Government;
(iv) Ireland & The Impacts of Brexit dated 13th March 2018 - Minister for Business,
Enterprise & Innovation, Ms. Heather Humphreys T.D.
Items i (i), (ii), (iii) & (iv) deferred.
4. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mr. Conor McNamara, RIP
Mrs. Coyne, RIP
Ms. Margaret Conneely, RIP
Mrs. Ita Kelly, RIP
Mr. Barry Mitchell, RIP
Baby Grace Gilmartin, RIP
The Mayor and Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those
recently bereaved including the member of staff of Galway City Council who were recently
bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Galway Corinthians Rugby Football Club, Management Team on the recent achievement of
winning the U-13, U-14 & U-17 Connacht Cup Finals.
The meeting concluded at 3.45 p.m.
i
& Signed
es, Corf
Mayor of Galway
4