Presiding:
Present Councillors:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 9th July, 2018 at 2.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway
B. Cameron, C. Connolly, P. Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, P. Flannery, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms. N. Moggan, A/Director of Services
Ms. P. Philbin, Director of Services
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. M. O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
M. Cubbard & Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Cllr.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mayor McNelis proposed that "the meeting conclude at 6.30pm to allow Councillors to attend the
funerals of relatives of Councillors P. Keane and M. Cubbard and to hold a Minutes silence in
respect to the deceased." This proposal was seconded by Cllr. T. 01 Flaherty.
The Motion was unanimously agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"A Special Meeting to be held next Monday 16th at 4pm to deal with reports of committee
meetings and reports from officials including Quarterly Reports"
The Motion was unanimously agreed.
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 11th June 2018.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
(b) Minutes of Annual MeetingofGalway City Council heldon Friday 15th June 2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
(c) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on Friday 19th June
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Matters of Accuracy:
Cllr. P. Conneely to forward matters of accuracy to Meetings Administrator.
Cllr. D. Lyons informed that a roll call vote from previous meeting was not recorded in the Minutes.
It was agreed that this would be rectified in the Minutes
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (a) Strategic Housing Development (SHD) Application for Proposed Student Housing Development at
Westwood Hotel Site , Dangan, Upper Newcastle Galway. An Bord Pleanala Ref. 301693 -18 in
accordance with Planning and Development (Housing) and Residential Tenancies Act 2016 Section 8
subsection 4 (c) (ii).
Mr. Liam Blake Senior Executive Planner advised Councilors, that this was not a standard planning
application process. Unlike a Part VIII application, no vote would be taken by Councillors, instead
their views will be noted and will accompany a report from the CE to An Bord Pleanala before the
19thJuly.
Councillors expressed views in relation to Policy, Density, Height, Size, Overshadowing, Operation of
Accommodation, Commercial Element, Transportation Issues, Car Parking, Noise, Anti- Social
Behaviour, loss of the Westwood Hotel to the local community, Residential Amenity located on
Campus, Demolition & validity of the application. Two Elected Members indicated that they had
made submissions to An Bord Pleanala which were not accepted.
Mr Blake clarified queries raised by the Councillors confirming that it was An Bord Pleanala who
would make the decision in relation to the application and not Galway City Council. He also
informed that City Planners supported the application in principle but the scheme required to be
reduced in size in accordance with the City Development Plan. The Planners had concerns re the
scale of the development, height, overdevelopment, transport & parking, summer visitors/tourists
and that these recommendations will be expressed to An Bord Pleanala by the Planning
Department along with the Councillors views and the CE in his report.
The CE informed Cllrs that if they wished to put forward a submission to him directly they were
welcome to do so and it would be included as appendix in his report to An Bord Pleanala.
2
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
"To append the submissions of Councillors P. Conneely & B. Cameron to the report being sent to
An Bord Pleanala"
The Motion was unanimously agreed.
2 (b) Capital Allocation for Publicly Funded Housing Loans
Mr. Dermot Mahon, SEO Housing informed the meeting that Galway City Council has introduced
the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loan Scheme in accordance with the Housing (Rebuilding Ireland
Home Loans) Regulations 2018 (S.I. No. 25 of 2018). Mr. Mahon outlined the terms of the scheme,
including that applicants must be first time buyers, refused finance from two commercial lending
institutions and meet certain income limits. He also confirmed the Department of Housing,
Planning & Local Government has provided Galway City Council with a capital allocation of €1.5m in
2018.
Councillors P. Conneely, C. Connolly, N. Larkin, T. O'Fiaherty, D. McDonnell & M. Lohan, F. Fahy, O.
Crowe & B. Cameron raised queries in relation to further funding, cost of loan to Galway City
Council, timeframe, employment criteria, deposit, staffing, tenant purchase scheme and succession
to tenancy.
Cllr. F. Fahy made an inappropriate comment which he was asked to withdraw by the Mayor. As
Cllr. Fahy would not withdraw the remark the Mayor suspended the meeting for 5 minutes at
5.50pm. The meeting resumed at 5.55pm and following a further request from the Mayor Cllr. Fahy
withdrew the comment.
Mr. Mahon clarified the issues confirming applicants required 15% deposit with Galway City
Council, 85% loan to value, no timescale set out, the eligibility of Galway City Council tenants and
that the Housing Department were processing loan applications as quickly as possible.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Crowe
"that the elected members of Galway City Council approve the raising of a loan of €1.5m from the
Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government through Housing Finance Agency, for the
purpose of granting house purchase and improvement loans in Galway City. "
The Motion was agreed unanimously & carried.
Two Section 22 notices were handed up to Mayor at Meeting by Cllr. F.Fahy & Cllr. D. McDonnell
and were noted without debate.
3
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy
Seconded: Cllr. N. McNeilis
"That Galway City Council supports the #Makewayday campaign". That Galway City Council
supports the establishment of an annual national Make Way Day taking place on the 26th of
September in 2018, recognizing that people with disabilities have the same right to use and enjoy
public spaces that we all share, acknowledging the obstacles which people with disabilities face in
their daily lives, including badly parked vehicles and bicycles, billboards, overgrown hedges and
other ill-placed hazards understanding that most obstacles are caused by thoughtlessness and
genuine lack of awareness. Galway City Council will write to An Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, and to
each individual minister and minister of state calling on them to support, establish, fund and
resource an annual national "Make Way Day" which will annually support and promote a local
#MakewaydayGalwayCity campaign as part of the wider "Make Way Day".
In Favour: 13 Against: O Absent: 5
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Crowe
"That his Section 22 Motion in relation to a variation of the City Development Plan on lands
at Ballybrit, is left as a motion on the agenda until September Meeting.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Absent: 5
3. REPORTS OF COMMIITEE MEETINGS
(a) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of 11th June 2018
Deferred to July Special meeting.
(b) Report from Procedures Committee held on Thursday 8th March 2018
Deferred to July Special Meeting.
(c) Report from Procedures Committee held on Monday 28th May 2018
Deferred to July Special Meeting.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Flood Risk Management Plan (CFRAM)
Presentation from Ms C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer Transportation, on Flood Risk Management Plan.
Ms Kilcoyne outlined the history, legislation and Galway City Councils obligation in relation to the
assessment & management of flood risk in Galway City and surrounds. Some of the main points
included NonStructural Flood Risk Prevention & Preparedness Measures and Structu ral Flood
Protection Measures including viable flood relief measures around Galway City & Salthill.
4
The Mayor & Cllrs D. Lyons, F. Fahy, C. Connolly, T.Ü Flaherty, J. Walsh, M. Lohan & B. Cameron
thanked Ms Kilcoyne for her presentation & findings. Queries raised byClIrs included liability if
flood defenses were not to work, funding, consultation with business & community groups,
timeframe, effect on protected views, Waterford & German examples, commitment by the
Minister for over run on budget, areas in private ownership and partnership with OPW.
Ms Kilcoyne advised Cllrs that the Plan was at a preliminary stage and that it will be upto 2 years
before the Council commence works on site. She informed that the Council was aware of private
areas, that RA land will would be catered for at South Park and confirmed that consultation has
been carried out with further consultation to take place once the scheme detail was developed.
The Chief Executive Mr. B. McGrath complemented Ms Kilcoyne and her team for work carried out
during the severe flooding in Galway earlier on this year. He also thanked and apologized to
Minister Moran for the nature of the welcome he received when he came to Galway. Mr.
McGrath confirmed that Ms Kilcoyne & Ms H. Coleman have been nominated to sit on the steering
group and outlined the various stages of the project from design to construction with an
estimated cost upto €15m.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
"The adoption of the Flood Risk Management Plan (CFRAM")
In Favour: 13 Against: O Absent: 5
(b)
European Region of Gastronomy 2018
Presentation by Ms Elaine Donohoe, Galway County Council, on Galway, West of Ireland 2018,
European Region of Gastronomy. Ms Donohoe spoke about the ERG Designation & Approach, an
update on activity, the importance of investing in food & food culture in Galway City for a stronger
future and her engagement with John & Sally McKenna.
Cllrs welcomed the presentation and the positive news for the City & County. Cllrs O. Crowe, B.
Cameron, P. Conneely, M. Farrell, C. Connolly, T. O' Flaherty & D. Lyons raised queries in relation
to the cost of membership & van hire, lasting legacy, updates throughout the year, invitation of
the City Mayor to events, acknowledging the funding from GCC, benefits of seaweed and
education courses run for chefs.
Ms Donohoe responded to queries raised by Cllrs including confirmation that the charter is
free, Mayor will be invited to all appropriate events, efforts to get as much food sourced
locally as possible which should all lead to a long term legacy in Galway. Ms Donohoe also
informed that she would revert to the meeting in relation to the cost of the Vintage Van hire as
she did not have figures to hand at the meeting.
The Chief Executive stated that there will be crossover between the European Region of
Gastronomy and Galway 2020. A recent example of this was Project Baba which was
attended by thousands of people in Athenry on Sat 7th July. This event celebrated sheep,
from its inception to death using all parts of the sheep in food & textiles.
5
(c)
Appointment of Committees- Galway City Local Community Development Committee -
Appointment of One (1) Member (for the lifetime of the Council).
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
"that Cllr. Noel Larkin be appointed to Galway City Community Development Committee for the
lifetime of the Council "
The Motion was agreed unanimously.
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
0)
(k)
Christmas Market 2018
Dealt with at the previous meeting.
Chief Executive's Report for May 2018
Deferred to July Special Meeting.
Chief Executive's Reportfor June 2018
Deferred to July Special Meeting.
Chief Executive's Report for July 2018
Deferred to July Special Meeting.
Circular 04/2018 from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government-
Implementation Roadmapfor the National Planning Framework
Deferred.
Circular 05/2018 from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government- Urban
Regeneration & Development Fund - Call for Proposals
Deferred.
Circular APH 1/2018 from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government-
Services Sites Fund (SSF) 2018 - Callfor proposals.
Deferred.
Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th June 2018
(i) Environment - agreed to discuss atJuly special meeting
(ii) Recreation & Amenity - agreed to discuss at July Special Meeting
(iii) Transportation- agreed to discuss at July Special Meeting
(iv) Housing - agreed to discuss at July Special Meeting
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development - agreed to discuss at July
Special Meeting
6
5. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
Motion submitted by Cllr. C. Connolly, at Council Meeting 9th June 2018
"That Galway City Council write to the Minister to designate Galway as a pilot project for the removal of
hazardous waste. "
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
In Favour: 11 Against: O
Absent: 7
NOM 13/18
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government to ratify, as soon as possible, The Convention against
Trafficking in Human Organs which was adopted by the Council of Europe on 9 July 2014 in order to
criminalise illegal organ transplantations. The Irish Government has already signed this convention, but is
yet to ratify it.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
In Favour: 11 Against: O
Abstentions: 2 Absent: 5
NOM 16/16
Notice given by: C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to intervene in
the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the harbour authorities".
Not Considered
NOM 2/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister Katherine
Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have access to quality,
sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for professional in the sector. Early
Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children during the most
crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care and education. However a
lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are
struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered
7
NOM 4/17
Notice given by: C. 6 Conchüir
Date Received: 2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as regards
educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses
means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by
younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives
are given to young people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive
as possible".
Not Considered
NOM 6/17
Notice given by: C. Ö Conchüir
Date Received: 26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hEireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dheanamh ar an gcinneadh a
ghlac sl deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil n6 ar a toil ag Uachtaran na hOlIscoile
agus toil na Comhairle a dheanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun cinn mar chathair dhatheangach.
Not Considered
NOM 9/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing so,
advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the European
Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing"
Not Considered
NOM 10/17
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received 3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Eireann of 35% between 2009
and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Eireann so that the company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered
8
NOM 12/17
Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region approach
to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not Considered
NOM 12/17
Notice given by: Cllr. P. Flannery
Date Received: 29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region approach
to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not Considered
NOM 13/17
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches broadcast on
channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in order to allow access
for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a
unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with
significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not Considered
Notice given by: Cllr. D. Lyons
NOM21/17
Date Received: 25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus licence as a
matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Slf Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na
Mara, Fana Buf, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisfn and Mhaoilln located on the Upper
Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered
9
NOM 22/17
Notice given by: Cllr. O. Crowe
Date Received: 3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new criminal
offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators"
Not Considered
NOM 2/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming increasingly
unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious affordable rental and purchase
housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing
Co-operatives with clear annual targets for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance
Ireland fund to prioritise loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led
affordable housing schemes"
Not Considered
NOM 6/18
Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will "honour our
commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement of the conflict". Galway City
Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr. Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U.
countries and swiftly recognise the State of Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered
NOM 8/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received: 13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the HSE to review
the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in chronic pain, outside those
experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-december status while this review is being
undertaken."
Not Considered
10
NOM 9/18
Notice given by: Cllr. M. Lohan
Date Received: 22nd April 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to direct hires.
As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT charge it is of direct
and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not Considered
NOMIO/18
Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 22nd April 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of the indigenous
people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental rights and has refused to
comply with international law; noting also that Israel continues to illegally occupy and colonise Palestinian
land, discriminates against Palestinian citizens of Israel, imposes an inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza
and denies Palestinian refugees the right to return to their homes, Galway City Council fully supports and
endorses the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement for freedom, equality and justice
and commits itself to discontinue all business contracts it has with Hewlett-Packard, both HP Inc. and
Hewlett Packard Enterprise for business and government services, as well as the HP spin-off DXC Technology
as HP and DXC provide and operate much of the technology infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its
system of apartheid and settler colonialism over the Palestinian people.
Not Considered
NOM 11/18
Notice given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
Date Received: 22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on students, and on
the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also -Agrees that increased housing for
students will relieve demand on housing across the city; and also -Recognises the need for additional
housing to serve the city's student population; and further -Calls on the minister for Housing, Planning and
Local Government for the implementation of limits on increases in student housing rents, in particular in
areas that are designated as Rent Pressure Zones; and -Pending such regulations, calls on housing providers
within the City to limit fee increases for student housing to the percentage rates allowed for Rent Pressure
Zones; and -Directs the Chief Executive of the Council to forward copies of the motion to the Minister for
Housing, Planning and Local Government, and also to the Minister for Education and Skills. Further to
forward copies to the Presidents of NUIG and GMIT.
Not Considered
11
NOM 12/18
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June 2018
Galway City Council introduce changing places bathrooms that are accessible for all wheelchair users,
which will include a height adjustable changing bench, hoist, and enough space for the person with a
disability and up to two carers. And further that Galway City Council would incorporate the requirement for
these facilities in future Planning Conditions for all major developments.
Not Considered
NOM 14/18
Notice given by: Cllr. C. Connolly
Date Received: 5th June 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand the
Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun Gong
practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not Considered
6. QUESTIONS
Q2/18
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received: 2nd January, 2018
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the Helipad on
the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and what are the long
term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered
7. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Items 7(a) to (c) were noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 19th June 2018 from Kerry County Council Re: Resolution adopted
(b) Correspondence dated 19th June 2018 from Kerry County Council Re: Resolution adopted
(c) Correspondence dated 2Pt June 2018 from Denis Naughten, T.D., Minister for
Communications, Climate Action & Environment Re: Management of waste paints
12
8. CONFERENCES
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan and agreed by Councillors for approval of
attendance at the following Conference:
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
1)
Title: The Parnell Society, Summer School 2018
Date: 12th -16th August 2018
Venue: Avondale House & Conference Hall & the Woodenbridge Hotel, Avoca, Co. Wicklow
The following Councillor was approved to attend: Cllr. Declan McDonnell
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mrs. Mary Heneghan (nee Flaherty) R.I.P
Mr. Johnny Mullen, R.I.P.
Mrs. Anna O'Brien, R.I.P.
Mrs. Maureen Beatty, R.I.P
Mr. Daniel Keogh, R.I.P.
Mrs. Sal 0' Maille, R.I.P.
Sr. Nora Lohan, R.I.P.
Mr. Paddy McManus, R.I.P.
Fr. Patrick Burke, R.I.P.
Mrs. Joan Dwyer, R.I.P.
Mrs. Pixie Loftus, R.I.P.
Mrs. Nora Codyre, R.I.P.
Mr. Patrick Kennelly, R.I.P.
Mrs. Breda Alcock, R.I.P.
Mr. Patrick Tiernan, R.I.P.
Mr. Hugh Coyle, R.I.P.
Mrs. Elizabeth Lydon, R.I.P.
Min
onfirmed & Signed
Mayor' of Galway
The Mayor and Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those recently bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Galway hurling & football teams,
Galway Camogie Teams,
Mervue U16 soccer team.
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
The meeting concluded at 6.35pm.
13