Minutes of Annual Meeting of Galway City Council, held on Friday
15th June 2018, at 4.00 p.m. in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Present:
Councillors:
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway
C. Connolly, C. Ö Conchüir, M. Lohan, M. Cubbard, N. Larkin, B.
Cameron, N. McNelis, P. Keane, M. Crowe, O. Crowe, J. Walsh,
P. Conneely, F. Fahy, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O'Flaherty
In Attendance: Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance
Ms. G McMahon, A/Director of Services
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery proposed the suspension of standing orders to permit photography in
the Chamber during the meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. O'Flaherty and agreed by
the Council.
Mayor Flannery referred back to his election as Mayor in June 2017 where he spoke
about transparency and integrity in office and opening up and publicising council
activity. Council Meetings were brought out into the public domain, meetings were held
in G.M.I.T & N.U.I.G. A popular public column is published in the Galway Advertiser about
activities at the City Council. As Mayor he further developed links between Galway City
and the Academic Institutions and in this regard he met with representatives of Stanford
University in California, MIT & Harvard in Massachusetts & Washington State University
in Seattle.
Mayor Flannery visited Milwaukee, Menlo Park, Seattle, Boston, Cambridge
Massachusetts & Chicago throughout his term as Mayor. Ambassadors were welcomed
from France, Croatia, Estonia, India, Canada, Germany, Japan, United Kingdon & Spain to
mention just a few for official visits to City Hall. During his terms as Mayor, Civic
Receptions were held for Gavan Hennigan, the Galway Minor & Senior Hurling teams, Dr.
Jim Browne, President Emeritus of N.U.I.G. & Rahm Emanuel, Mayor of Chicago. The
Freedom ofthe City was also bestowed on Mayor Martin J. Walsh from Boston.
Mayors from other cities were welcomed notably from our sister cities in the US of Menlo
Park, Chicago & Boston. It is expected that Mayor Jenny Durkan of Seattle will visit
Galway & Mayor Marc McGovern of Cambridge Massachusetts has also confirmed that
he will take up an invitation to visit Galway. It is also expected that the WB Yeats ship
will be twinned with Galway City later this year.
1
Mayor Flannery also mentioned some unwelcome guests i.e. Hurricane Ophelia, flooding
in January 2018, the unusually high snow levels in March, Storm Hector and commended
the emergency task force for their diligence. The Mayor also welcomed Minister Kevin
Boxer Moran, Minister of State for OPW and Flood Relief and delivery on his promise to
provide funding of almost €10 million for flood defenses in the City.
It was a year of highlights for Mayor Flannery paying particular attention to the
homecoming in Pearse Stadium of the victorious Galway Minor & Senior Hurling teams.
He referenced the Mayoral Charity Ball which raised close to €35,000 for local charities.
The Mayor thanked his wife Orla and his family for their support over the past year in
his role as the Mayor ofthe City, he thanked the Deputy Mayor, Cllr. M. Cubbard and all
the elected members, the staff of Corporate Services, the Chief Executive and
Management team and all the staff of the City Council for their support and assistance.
Mayor Flannery wished the new incoming Mayor and Deputy Mayor ofthe City of Galway
well and an enjoyable and successful year ahead.
Councillors then extended compliments to Mayor Flannery and congratulated him on his
achievements during his term. The achievements and highlights were noted and
acknowledged and members thanked the outgoing Mayor for his courtesy and fairness
and taking his role seriously, for demonstrating commitment to the role and his duties
as Mayor of the City and for representing the City locally, nationally and internationally.
Chief Executive, B. McGrath expressed thanks and compliments to the Mayor on his
behalf and all the staffin Galway City Council noting that Cllr. Flannery had represented
the City with dignity and pride during his term.
1. Election of Mayor
Cllr. Flannery sought nominations for the election of Mayor for the coming term.
Cllr. N. McNelis was proposed by Cllr. B. Cameron and seconded by Cllr. D.
McDonnell.
Cllr. B. Cameron spoke in favour of his proposal and outlined the qualities, capabilities
and experience of Cllr. N. McNelis, which would make him a suitable and appropriate
person to become Mayor of Galway. Cllr. D. McDonnell as a seconder of the proposal also
spoke in favour of the nomination of Cllr. N. McNelis.
No other nominations were received.
Ir. Flannery declared Cllr. N. McNelis elected as Mayor of the City of Galway.
A number of Councillors then offered congratulations to Mayor McNelis and his family
on his election as Mayor of Galway. Councillors offered advice to the Mayor and wished
him all the best for the year ahead. His leadership qualities and abilities were noted and
Councillors welcomed him to the position and offered their support. The Chief Executive,
Mr. McGrath on behalf of the staff of the City Council congratulated Mayor McNelis on
2
his election and offered him the support ofthe Senior Management team and all the staff
of the Council.
Mayor McNelis thanked Cllr. B. Cameron for the nomination & seconder Cllr. D.
McDonnell. He also thanked his wife, family & party colleagues. The elected members
were thanked & he looks forward to working with the C.E. Mr. Brendan McGrath. He also
complimented and thanked the outgoing Mayor Cllr. Flannery. Mayor McNelis
expressed gratitude for the support he got and he promised to work hard on behalf of
the people of Galway. He hopes to continue some projects that were introduced during
the terms of former Mayors and continue on the work of the outgoing Mayor and make
meetings of the council and its committees more business like and productive. He also
outlined that he wishes to hold at least one Council Meeting in N.U.I.G & G.M.I.T as carried
out by previous Mayor.
As Mayor he hopes to be involved in the following projects; Galway City Centre
Transport Management Plan, Dublin Road Bus Corridor, Tuam Road Bus Corridor,
Cappagh Park & Renmore all weather pitch upgrades & the Cluain Mhuire Pitch
Development, Rahoon Cemetery extension, CIE Ceannt Station Lands, Bonham Quay,
Crown Site all to name but a few.
As Mayor he looks forward to joining the Board of Galway 2020 and working with other
members and with all of the 2020 team to ensure that Galway delivers. The work of
volunteers in our City must also be acknowledged and he will continue to work with
volunteers and youth engagement.
As a business representative he will continue to be involved and work with groups such
as Galway Chamber, GCBA, Latin Quarter, West End, Galway Village East, Woodquay and
Salthill Village.
The Mayor also hopes to tackle the issue of mental health in our Community.
2. Election of Deputy Mayor
Mayor McNelis sought nominations for the election of Deputy Mayor for the coming
term.
Cllr. D. Lyons was proposed by Cllr. T O'Flaherty and seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery.
No other nominations were received.
Mayor McNelis declared Cllr. D. Lyons elected as Deputy Mayor.
Cllr. D. Lyons thanked the Councillors for supporting him and said that it is a huge
honour to be elected as Deputy Mayor.
3
& Signa
Mayor of Ga way
3. Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
(a) Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd.
Appointment of One (1) Member (for a period of one year)
Previous Member: Cllr. D. McDonnell.
On the proposal of Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty the outgoing
member Cllr. D. McDonnell was nominated for a further period of one year.
Mayor McNelis declared Cllr. D. McDonnell elected.
(b) Galway Civic Trust
Appointment of Two (2) Members (for a period of one year)
On the proposal of Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. J. Walsh, Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. B.
Cameron were jointly nominated for a period of one year.
Mayor McNelis declared Cllr. F. Fahy and Cllr. B. Cameron elected.
4. To Fix Dates for Meetings of Galway City Council
A schedule of dates for Ordinary Meetings for the coming term were proposed by Mayor
McNelis. Cllr. O. Crowe proposed that the meeting commence at 2.00 p.m. & this was
seconded by Cllr. P. Flannery. Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that the start times stay at 4.00
p.m. Cllr B. Cameron put forward a proposal to amend the motion by Cllr. O Crowe as
the wording on the Agenda does not allow deal with the time of meetings. It was agreed
to discuss the matter of start times of meetings at the Ordinary Council Meeting on 9th
July 2018.
9th July, 2018
10th September, 2018
8th October, 2018
12th November, 2018
10th December, 2018
14th January, 2019
11th February, 2019
11th March, 2019
8th April, 2019
13th May, 2019
10th June, 2019
Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. mentioned that the meeting date of 10th June 2019 as proposed is
subject to change due to the local elections in 2019.
5 p.m.
4