Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 14thMay, 2018 at 2.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell,P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan,D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. T. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive,
Ms. E. McCormack, Director of Services,
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services,
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner,
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
Mayor Flannery proposed to defer Item 2(b) Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws
2018 until later in the Meeting to give an opportunity for all Councillors to be present for
this Agenda item. This was seconded by Cllr. O. Crowe and agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
I(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 9th April;
I(b) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 23rd April at 2pm;
I(c) Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council held on 23rdApril at 4pm.
Mayor Flannery proposed the adoption of Minutes listed under Item 1 (a), I(b) & I(c) and
that any matters arising or questions should be submitted in writing to the Meetings
Administrator for response. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan and agreed.
1
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (a) To consider a Proposed Variation to the Galway City Development Plan to amend
Specific Objectives on the Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map in the Ballybrit
Business Park area relating to the reserved route corridor for the N6 Galway City Ring
Road (N6 GCRR), the alignment of the Bus Route (GTS) and the alignment of the Primary
Cycle Network
Ms. H. Coleman, Senior Executive Planner presented to the meeting. She outlined the
proposed variation to the Galway City Development Plan that was circulated to Members on
26th April 2018. She further advised that the proposed variation went on public display from
Thursday 8th March 2018 to Wednesday 11th April 2018. She confirmed that 6 submissions
were received and Ms. Coleman outlined a summary of the submissions/observations
received and Chief Executive's opinion and response to same. She finally recommended to
the Elected Members to consider the contents and the Chief Executive's Report which
includes recommendation to make a variation to the Galway City Development Plan 2017-
2023.
Members raised a number of issues which were debated and discussed including date of
submission for Galway City Ring Road to An Bord Pleanåla; clarification regarding the
purpose and nature of the proposed variation. Ms. H. Coleman and Ms. C. Phelan provided
detailed replies to member's queries.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded:Cllr. D. McDonnell
"To adopt the proposed variation to the Galway City Development Plan to amend
Specific Objectives on the Land Use Zoning and Specific Objectives Map in the Ballybrit
Business Park area relating to the reserved route corridor for the N6 Galway City Ring
Road (N6 GCRR), the alignment of the Bus Route (GTS) and the alignment of the Primary
Cycle Network— per Report distributed 26th April 2018".
In Favour: 14 Against: O
Abstain: O
The Variation was adopted.
Present:14
Mayor Flannery proposed that the meeting conclude at 8.45pm with a break at 5.30pm
for 30 minutes. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and a vote was taken:
In Favour: 13
Against: 1 Abstain: O Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
2
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 8th March 2018
Mayor Flannery informed the Meeting that the next procedures meeting of the Procedures
Committee is to be scheduled before the end of May and suggested that Item 3(a) be
deferred to the June Ordinary Council meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To defer Item 3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 8th March 2018 to
the June Ordinary Council Meeting'.
In Favour: 15Against:OAbstain:O Present: 15
This was agreed.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(b) Amenity Grants 2018
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services advised Councillors that the Amenity Grants
Scheme 2018 was advertised and the closing date for applications was 22nd March 2018. He
confirmed that 104 applicants were recommended for allocations of varied amounts per
Report circulated to Members.
Councillors expressed their positive views on the scheme and acknowledged the work done
by the City Council and by volunteers in the City. Queries raised included how amounts were
determined for allocation; application criteria and clarification regarding individual
applications; oversight, governance and auditing procedures; any facility to increase
amounts; could specific areas in the East and West of the city be targeted annually for
funding; potential implications for Scheme if amalgamation between Galway City and
Galway County Council proceeded; insurance costs; procurement for supplies; private
rented properties and enforcement of minimum standards; quality of grass cutting in the
City; City & County Task force areas & Spring clean ups; consideration be given to increased
funding for the Scheme in Budget 2019; discussion regarding allotments and community
gardens and a suggestion that the Amenity Grants Scheme be referred to the Strategic
Policy Committee for review.
Mr. G. McMahon replied to queries and clarifications raised in detail and confirmed that he
would revert to Councillors in regard to any specific queries raised. He reminded Councillors
that the Mayors Awards will be held in the Galmont Hotel at 7pm on Tuesday 15th May
2018.
3
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"That Galway City Council extend the Amenity Grants to all Community Gardens and
Allotment Schemes"
In Favour:10Against:4Abstain:OPresent: 14
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'To approve Amenity Grants 2018 — per Report circulated'
In Favour:14Against:OAbstain:OPresent: 14
The Amenity Grants 2018 were approved.
4(c) Consideration of National Planning Framework
Deferred.
4(d) Consideration of National Development Plan 2018 - 2027
Deferred.
4(e) Chief Executive's Report for April 2018
Not Considered.
4(f) Chief Executive's Report for May 2018
Deferred.
4(g) Christmas Market 2017
Members discussed the Christmas Market and raised queries and clarifications which
included the operation of the Christmas Market 2017; Report data; the Beer Kellar tent;
standards and measures used at the Beer Kellar tent; proposal for earlier closing time for
bar; ferris wheel; litter management; security; fairtrade; the proportion of craft,
entertainment and other attractions versus food services; the impact of visitors on bed
nights to the City; proposal to open Market one week earlier and promotion of the Market.
In response, Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services elaborated further on the
recommendation of the Interim Report and, in particular, the opportunity arising to apply
the allocated budget funding towards an enhanced "Christmas in GalwaV' offer. It was
agreed that a finalised Report would come before the Members for consideration at the
June Council meeting.
Mayor Flannery advised that a meeting as agreed to have been held with the taxi and
transport interests had not yet taken place.
4
2(b) Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2018
Councillors discussed the Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2018 in detail and
expressed their views on the Draft Byelaws.
Mr. Gary McMahon, A/Director of Services referred to 403 submissions that were received
in response to the public display of the Draft Byelaws and responded to queries raised in
detail.
As it was agreed at the start of the meeting to break at 17.30pm, approaching this Cllr. D.
McDonnell proposed that Standing Orders be suspended until Item 2(b) Draft Street
Performance & Busking Byelaws 2018be dealt with and a break to be taken thereafter. This
was seconded by Cllr. M. Cubbard and agreed.
Cllr. P. Keane proposed "To amend the Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2018
as follows:
On Page 1: DELETE:definition of ('Battery Powered Portable Amplification";
On Page 2: DELETE no. 5;
on Page 2: DELETE no: 6 and REPLACE WITH: 'A person under 16 years can only perform in
circumstances where the said legal guardian is present during the performance;
on Page 2: Delete no. 7;
on Page 3 DELETE no. 8 and no. 9;
On Page 3: DELETE wording in no.16and REPLACE with:'Amplification and Backing Tracks as
defined in these Bye-Laws shall be prohibited on the Protected Street Scape up to 18:00
hours and the use of Drum Kits is expressly prohibited on the Protected Street Scape SAVE
AND EXCEPT as directed by the provisions of any derogation granted under these Bye-Laws';
On Page 4: no.17DELETE the words: 'in consultation with the Garda Siochåna'.
This proposal was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir proposed an amendment to Cllr. P. Keane's motion'tThat the Voluntary
Code of Conduct be piloted for six months". This amendment was seconded by Cllr. B.
Cameron.
Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and Cllr. M. Cubbard requested that a roll call vote be
taken on the matter. This was agreed. Mayor Flannery read the motions submitted and a
Roll Call Vote was taken:
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment was considered first.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"That the Voluntary Code of Conduct be piloted for six months"
In Favour: 9: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. M. Lohan, Cllr. N. McNelis and Cllr. J. Walsh
Against: 9:CIlr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. P. Flannery,
5
Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell and
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
In Favour: 9 Against: 9 Abstain: O Present: 18
In line with Standing Order no. 62 (b) Where there is an equity of votes, by a second or
casting vote of the person chairing the meeting (which person shall have and may choose
to exercise such a vote).
Mayor Flannery chose to exercise his vote 'Against' the Amendment.
The amendment was rejected.
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment is rejected so the original Motion is
considered.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
"To amend the Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws 2018 as follows:
On Page 1: DELETE: definition of "Battery Powered Portable Amplification";
On Page 2: DELETE no. 5;
On Page 2: DELETE no: 6 and REPLACE WITH: 'A person under 16 years can only perform
in circumstances where the said legal guardian is present during the performance;
On Page 2: Delete no. 7;
On Page 3 DELETE no. 8 and no. 9;
On Page 3: DELETE wording in no.16 and REPLACE with: 'Amplification and Backing
Tracks as defined in these Bye-Laws shall be prohibited on the Protected Street Scape up
to 18:00 hours and the use of Drum Kits is expressly prohibited on the Protected Street
Scape SAVE AND EXCEPT as directed by the provisions of any derogation granted under
these Bye-Laws';
On Page 4: no.17 DELETE the words: 'in consultation with the Garda Siochåna'.
The Original Motion was then voted on:
In Favour: 9: Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. P. Flannery,
Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N. Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell and
Cllr. T. O'Flaherty.
Against: 9:Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. M. Cubbard,
Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell, Cllr. M. Lohan, Cllr. N. McNelis and Cllr. J. Walsh
In Favour: 9 Against: 9Abstain: O Present: 18
In line with Standing Order no. 62 (b) Where there is an equity of votes, by a second or
casting vote of the person chairing the meeting (which person shall have and may choose
to exercise such a vote).
Mayor Flannery chose to exercise his vote 'In Favour' of the Motion.
The Draft Street Performance & Busking Byelaws were adopted, as amended.
6
The Council rose for a break at 18:50pm and resumed the meeting at 19:20pm.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. N. McNelis
'That Galway City Council provide designated multi use artistic space for circle acts at
Eyre Square and Fish Market Square;
In Favour: 13
Against:O
Abstain:O Present: 13
The Motion was approved.
4.CONSlDERATlON OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(a) To receive update Report on Ireland West Airport Knock ('WAK).
Mr. Donal Healy, Head of Aviation Business Development, Marketing & Communications
presented a Business Update regarding Ireland West Airport to the Meeting. He outlined
partnerships involved and funding including a proposed matching contribution in the region
of €15,000 by Galway City Council towards the Discovery Centre featuring imagery and
information specific to Galway City at the arrivals hall at the airport; passenger statistics for
2017; destinations served; 2018 business development; new route development; customer
base; delivering visitors to the region; overseas marketing; additional collaboration; major
supporter of Galway market; market research; airport transportation plan; airport
transportation and the key role of the airport in the future development of Galway.
Councillors discussed the Report circulated and raised queries and clarifications regarding
same. Matters raised included potential impact of Brexit; connectivity; the need to promote
access to Airport; bus transport operators; linkage; methodology for data on visitors to
Galway; status of payments from all partners; request for online smart phone friendly data
on the Visitor centre; promotion of environmentally friendly fuel and membership of the
board of IWAK.
Mr. Healy and Mr. Joe Gilmore, Chief Executive, IWAK responded to queries and
clarifications raised in detail.
Proposed: Cllr. O. Crowe
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
'That Galway City Council calls on the Board of Ireland West Airport Knock to have an
Elected Member from the region as a board member'
In Favour:14 Against:O
The Motion was approved.
Abstain:O Present:14
7
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
That Funding Allocation in the amount of €15,000 to Ireland West Airport Knock be
considered at the June Council Meeting'
In Favour: 14
Against:O
Abstain:O Present: 14
The Motion was approved.
4(h) Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014-2016
Noted.
4(i) Final IBAL Anti-Litter Survey Results for 2017
Noted. It was requested that the mid-year IBAL results be put on the June Ordinary Meeting
Agenda, if published.
4(j) Second Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government
Arrangements in Galway
Deferred.
4(k) BREXIT
Mayor Flannery proposed that a Brexit Workshop be held on Monday 11th June at 11.30am.
This was agreed.
Items 4(k)(i) to (vi) relating to Brexit were not considered.
(i) Impacts / Preparation / Planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of Article 50 of
the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government;
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging from
Brexit;
(iii) The view form Irish Local Government;
(iv) Ireland & The Impacts of Brexit dated 13th March 2018 - Minister for Business,
Enterprise & Innovation, Ms. Heather Humphreys T.D.;
(v) Brexit: Ireland's exposure to imports from UK highlighted dated 9th May;
(vi) Brexit - KPMG- Draft Agreement on UK withdrawal from EU dated 9th May 2018.
8
Mayor referred to Item7 (g) under Items for Councillors' Information
7(g) Correspondence dated 3rd May 2018 from Office of Public Works Re: Press Release —
Flood Risk Management Plans
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"That the Chief Executive write to Mr. Kevin "Boxer" Moran requesting an update and if
funding of €9 million to Galway City Council is included in Minister Moran's Report".
In Favour:14 Against:O
Abstain:O Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
"That the Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government be written to again
requesting the Government to facilitate the repayment of the loans on the76 unsold
affordable houses to Galway City Council directly so they can retain the houses in their
housing stock and an urgent meeting be again requested with the relevant Minister to
seek financial support in reducing the burden on Galway City Council for the 'land loans'
which are outstanding".
Against: 2 Abstain:O Present: 14
In Favour: 12
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"l call on the City Council to open the toilets in Ballyloughane and Silver Strand on the
weekends. Its mind boggling the closure of toilets at the weekend - the time they are
most in demand. It's ridiculous that the public toilets are open during the week and
they are locked up at the weekends when they are most needed".
Against:O
In Favour:12
The Motion was passed.
5. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
Abstain:O Present:12
Cllr. C. Connolly requested that Notice of Motion 09/16 submitted on 11th April 2016 be
considered at the Meeting. This was seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell. Mayor Flannery proceeded
to read the Notice of Motion for consideration by Members.
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
9
Mr. Connell, Deputy Chief Executive confirmed that Section IO currently funding is being
provided to provide housing for victims of domestic violence.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
It was proposed that the Notice of Motion be referred to the Housing Strategic Policy
Committee for consideration.
In Favour:7
Against:5
Abstain:O Present:12
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. B. Cameron requested that Notice of Motion 11/18 be considered. Mayor Flannery
proceed to read the Notice of Motion as amended and presented.
NOM 11/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
"Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on
students, and on the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also
agrees that increased housing for students will relieve demand on housing across the City;
and Calls on the minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government for the
implementation of limits on increases in student housing rents, in particular in areas that
are designated as Rent Pressure Zones; and -Pending such regulations, calls on housing
providers within the City to limit fee increases for student housing to the percentage rates
allowed for Rent Pressure Zones; and -Directs the Chief Executive of the Council to
forward copies of the motion to the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government,
and also to the Minister for Education and Skills. Further to forward copies to the
Presidents of NUIG and GMIT".
In Favour:12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was passed.
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a MhilHarbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
Not Considered.
10
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open.
We call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare".
Not Considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an ChomhairleseoarOllscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimhaisghairm a dhéanamhar an
gcinneadh a ghlacsideireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadhGaeilgear a thoilnåar a toil
ag Uachtarån na hOllscoileagus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamhagusGaillimh a churchuncinn
mar chathairdhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
Not Considered.
11
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural
Ireland and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing
a Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free
to air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches.
This should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which
belongs to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State
investment from taxpayer money"
Not Considered.
NOM 21/17Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates SliBurca, SliGheal, Leas na Mara, FanaBui, LeitirBurca, MaighBurca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilfn located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not Considered.
12
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement
of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr.
Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of
Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
NOM 8/18 Notice given by: Cllr. M. Farrell
Date Received:
13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the
HSE to review the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in
chronic pain, outside those experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-
december status while this review is being undertaken."
Not Considered.
NOM 9/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend
to direct hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a
profit and VAT charge it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit
from our budget.
Not Considered.
13
NOM 10/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of the
indigenous people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental
rights and has refused to comply with international law; noting also that Israel continues to
illegally occupy and colonise Palestinian land, discriminates against Palestinian citizens of
Israel, imposes an inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza and denies Palestinian refugees the
right to return to their homes, Galway City Council fully supports and endorses the
Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement for freedom, equality and
justice and commits itself to discontinue all business contracts it has with Hewlett-Packard,
both HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise for business and government services, as well
as the HP spin-off DXC Technology as HP and DXC provide and operate much of the
technology infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its system of apartheid and settler
colonialism over the Palestinian people.
Not Considered.
6.QUESTlONS
Q 2/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
2ndJanuary, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to
the Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these
meetings and what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered.
Q 3/18
Question given by: Cllr. B. Cameron
24th April, 2018.
Date Received:
Since the passing of TAP 2014-2018 and the presentation of CENA what progress has been
made with regard to traveller specific accommodation and have meetings of the L TACC
taken place in the meantime?
Response to Question issued.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
7.
Items 7(a) to (f) were noted.
Correspondence dated 9th March 2018 from Department of Housing, Planning &
(a)
Local Government
Re: Discussion of planning applications at Council Meetings
14
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
8.
Correspondence dated 9th March 2018 from Department of Housing, Planning &
Local Government
Re: Publication of Apartment Guidelines 2018
Correspondence dated 30th March 2018 from Office of the Taoiseach
Re: Acknowledgement & thanks to Galway City Council for the work given to the
State
during Storm Emma
Correspondence dated 2nd May 2018 from Northern & Western Regional Assembly
Re: Cathaoirleach's Newsletter
Correspondence dated 10th April 2018 from Senator Billy Lawless, Irish Senate
Re: Civic Reception & Dinner in honour of the visit of Mayor Rahm Emanuel
Correspondence dated 2nd May 2018 to Mayor Pearce Flannery from Department of
Housing, Planning and Local Government
Re: Acknowledgement of request to meet with the Minister in connection with the
proposed merger between Galway City and County Councils
CONFERENCES
It was proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan and agreed by
Councillors for approval of attendance at the following Approved Training Events:
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan
Approved Training
1)
Title: IPPB Accessibility & Inclusion through Infrastructure
Date: 11th, 12th& 13th May 2018
Venue: Sea Lodge Hotel, Waterville, Co. Kerry
The following Cou cillors
roved to attend:
Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Connee
Cathal 6 Conchüir & Cllr. Colette Connolly
Walsh, Cllr. Mark Lohan, Cllr.
9. VOTES OF SY
Votes of Sympathy:
Palestinian Citizens, RIP
Mr. Seamus McWilliams, RIP
Mr. Francis Barbour, RIP
Mr. Donal Bell, RIP
Mr. Martin Fahy, RIP
Mrs. Eileen Grealish, RIP
HY CONGRATULATION
The Mayor and Deputy Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached
to those recently bereaved including the members of staff of Galway City Council who were
recently bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
15
None.
10. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Annual Meeting be held on Friday 15th June at 6pm. This
was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"The Annual Meeting of Galway City Council be held on Friday 15th June at 6pm".
In Favour: 9Against: IAbstain: 2 Present:12
The Motion was passed.
The meeting concluded at 8.45 p.m.
& Signed
Mayor of Galway
16