Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 22nd October, 2018 at 2.30 p.m (re-scheduled from 15th October
Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
2018) in Galway City Council, Galway.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D.
Lyons, D. McDonnell, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr.
. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Mr
G. McMahon, A/Director of Services,
Mr.
C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Ms.
D. Mahon, A/Director of Services,
Mr.
N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance,
Ms.
U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Mr.
L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Ms.
. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms
Ms. G. Reilly, Staff Officer.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mayor McNelis proposed that the Meeting rise at 6pm for a break and that the Meeting
conclude at 7.30pm. This was agreed.
Mayor McNelis proposed the following scheduled meetings:
Statutory Budget Council Meeting - Monday 19th November 2018 - 4 p.m.;
Ordinary Council Meeting - Monday 12th November 2018 - 4 p.m.;
Special Council Meeting - Monday 26th November 2018 - 2 p.m. - 6 p.m.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that the Special Meeting start at 4 p.m. However, the schedule of
meetings as proposed by Cllr. McNelis was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty was agreed.
It was noted that a Joint Policing Committee Meeting is scheduled for Monday 26th November
2018 at 7pm.
Mayor McNelis proposed the deferring of Item 4 (h) Quarterly Reports to the Special meeting.
This was agreed. Cllr. C. Connolly did not agree with the deferring of this item.
Cllr. D. McDonnell proposed a vote of sympathy and a minutes silence in respect of the late
Vincent McNelis, father of Mayor Niall McNelis. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and
agreed. A vote of sympathy was raised by Cllr. McDonnell on the death of Martin Carroll. This
was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons A vote of sympathy was also raised for the late Emma Mhic
Mhathüna by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron and agreed. A minutes
silence ensued.
1
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th September
2018.
Matter raised by Councillors included Sports Capital Grants 2018 - 2019 including a
proposed hurling wall in the Westside.
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services responded in detail to matters raised regarding the
Sports Capital programme and funding.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
"That Galway City Council recognises that Corinthians Rugby Football Club is a Galway
City based club with its origins and history coming from the City of Galway.
Notwithstanding the fact that some of their facilities are in the County, we recognise it
as a City Club for the purposes of Galway City Council Sports Grants under the auspices
of the Sports Partnership"
It was proposed by Cllr. O. Crowe and seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis that Rahoon-
Newcastle GAA Club be recognised and added to this Motion. This was agreed.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell that Salthill Devon
Football Club be recognised and added to this Motion. This was agreed.
Following discussion, a Vote was then taken on the Motion.
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
A discussion was held regarding the merits and demerits of the proposal to extend the Sport
Capital Grants scheme outside the Galway City environs. Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
advised that the Sports Capital Grants scheme was for Galway City only and the Sports
Partnership was for both the City & County Councils. He advised that the proposal would
deflate the grants provided. However, should the Council decide to allocate funds to clubs
outside its area it should do so on a specific criteria basis.
The Chief Executive referred to a request from Salthill Devon Football Club for payment of
funding by Galway City Council for works completed at its facility. These works are to be co-
funded by Galway County Council but to date no funding has been received from Galway
County Council.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"To provide approved funding to Salthill Devon Football Club for works completed at its
facility"
2
In Favour: 15 Against: O
The Motion was passed.
Abstain: O
Present: 15
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
"Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 10th September
2018 were agreed and adopted".
It was noted that Councillors should submit any queries in relation to the September
Ordinary Meeting Minutes in writing to the Meetings Administrator in advance of the next
Ordinary Council meeting.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a) Audit Report on Annual Financial Statements for year ended 31st December 2017 &
Annual Report from Audit Committee
Ms. N. Moggan, A/Head of Finance referred to the Reports previously circulated to
Councillors.
Councillors raised and discussed a range of issues that were included in the Report including
various housing loans and grants; housing rents collection rates and rent review; shared
services between the City & County Councils; Galway 2020 financial contributions;
Solas/Galway Pélås Cinema project; alleged breach of procedure; unsold affordable housing;
bad debt provision; status of the Property Interest Register; internal audit; housing staff
levels; cost of Audit report and status of transfer functions to Irish Water. Cllr. P. Flannery
informed the Meeting that the Regional Assembly passed a motion endorsing and supporting
Galway 2020. A number of Councillors complimented the staff and board of Leisureland and
acknowledged the good work of the Procurement Unit.
Ms. N. Moggan responded to queries raised in detail.
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services responded to queries raised under the remit of the
Housing Department.
Cllr. O. Crowe referred to alleged damage of vehicles of two Fire Service staff during the
recent storm and requested the Chief Executive to examine same. He further requested that
a senior liaison person be appointed regarding Compulsory Purchase Orders for the Galway
Ring Road to examine housing needs. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. M. Crowe.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath acknowledged the positive audit Report. He commended
Ms. Moggan and the Finance team and acknowledged the work of the Audit team and former
Director Ms. E. McCormack. It was confirmed that a Report would issue to Councillors
regarding the status of lands and housing loans under the Land Aggregation Scheme prior to
the next Council meeting.
3
Mr. McGrath responded to queries in detail and confirmed that the City Council did not have
a direct role in relation to Fire Service staffing but that he would communicate matters raised
by Cllr's. Crowe to Galway County Council. Mr. McGrath referred to the Compulsory Purchase
Order process for the Galway City Ring Road advising that Galway County Council are the lead
authority but that he would communicate matters raised on behalf of Councillors to Galway
County Council. He further advised that a GCRR Update meeting will be held for Councillors
on Wednesday 24th October at 2pm in City Hall.
Councillors noted the Audit Report on Annual Financial Statements for year ended 31st
December 2017 & the Annual Report from the Audit Committee.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
"That Galway City Council calls on the Government to facilitate the repayment of the loans
on the 76 unsold affordable houses to Galway City Council directly so they can retain the
houses in their housing stock".
In Favour: 6 Against: 10 Abstain: O Present: 16
The Motion was defeated.
2 (b) Approval of Overdraft Accommodation for year ended 31st December 2019
Mayor McNelis referred Councillors to the Report issued under this Item by Ms. N. Moggan,
A/Head of Finance seeking approval for overdraft accommodation in 2019.
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
"Approval of Overdraft Facility of €5 million for the twelve month period from the ISt
January 2019 to 31st December 2019".
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The approval of overdraft was unanimously agreed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3 (a) Report from Corporate Policy Group Meeting of Friday 7th September 2018
Report Noted - Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
3 (b) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 6th September 2018
Deferred for consideration until 6pm - Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
4
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4 (a) Circular 05/2018 from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government — Urban
Regeneration & Development Fund - Call for Proposals
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive advised that Items 4(a) & 4(b) were on the July Ordinary
Council Meeting Agenda. He confirmed that submissions were made prior to deadline and
details of same are contained in the Chief Executive's Report. This was noted by Councillors.
Mr. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services gave an update to the Meeting on submissions under
Item 4(a).
4 (b) Circular APH 1/2018 from Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government —
Services Sites Fund (SSF) 2018 — Call for Proposals
Mr. D. Mahon, A/Director of Services gave an update to the Meeting on the submission under
Item 4(b).
Following discussion Councillors raised a number of queries which were responded to in
detail.
4 (c) Appointment of Committees - Appointment of One (1) Member onto the Galway City
Alcohol Forum (for a period of one year)
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"Appointment of Cllr. Mike Cubbard as a Member onto the Galway City Alcohol Forum
for a period of one year".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The appointment was unanimously agreed.
4 (d) Chief Executive's Report September 2018
4 (e) Chief Executive's Report October 2018
It was proposed by Cllr. F. Fahy that Items 4(d) & 4(e) be noted. This was seconded by Cllr. N.
McNelis and agreed.
Councillors raised and discussed a wide range of issues that were included in the Chief
Executive's Report including tree surveys; removal of tree and potential for carving/sculpture
in Eyre Square; City Centre Pedestrian Areas Surfacing Rehabilitation; "Christmas in GalwaV'
and request to repair/replace damaged plaque which was erected in memory Ms. Eileen
Costello O' Shaughnessy; Roundabout Upgrades; Galway City Museum; Mattress Amnesty
event under the Anti-Dumping Initiative 2018; anti-dumping initiatives in Ballybane;
advertisement of bulky goods service; solar bins; Cold Weather Response 2018/2019;
Community Enhancement Programme 2018; Comhairle na nÖg; Healthy Ireland Fund
Programme 2018; request for consultation with Councillors regarding Housing CALF Approval
in Belmont, Renmore; #Makewayday Campaign; Christmas Park and Ride Service 2018 and a
5
request for a Westside service; Galway City Centre Traffic Management Plan; traffic
congestion and illegal parking, parking app; Cappagh Park carparking and request for
goalmouth works to be completed and illegal camping in Salthill.
The Chief Executive and a number of Councillors complimented the staff of Galway City
Council and the assistance from Defence forces in relation to works during recent storms,
namely, Storm Ali and Storm Callum.
At 17.14, Cllr. D. Lyons took Chair of the Meeting, Cllr. N. McNelis resumed as Chair at 17.17.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath, Mr. T. Connell, Mr. U. Finn, Mr. G. McMahon, and Mr. D.
Mahon gave comprehensive replies to matter raised.
Mr. G. McMahon advised the Meeting that following submissions and discussion with the
business networks in the City, a programme of events and decorations has been proposed to
encompass the City for the Christmas season, which will complement the Christmas Market
in Eyre Square. The proposal Report was distributed to Councillors regarding the "Christmas
in Galway" lighting event with a budget of €150,000 included in the 2018 budget to fund this
event.
Cllr. P. Flannery submitted a Notice of Motion proposing that Salthill Village get a share of the
provision of Christmas lights. This motion was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
The Chief Executive advised that the proposal extended from Salthill to Prospect Hill.
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe
"Approval of €150,000 for the Christmas in Galway proposal - per Galway City Business
Groups Joint Christmas submission".
The proposal was agreed and approved.
The Mayor proposed a break at 18.00, this was agreed. The Meeting resumed at 18.25.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath, Mr. T. Connell, Mr. U. Finn, Mr. G. McMahon, and Mr. D.
Mahon gave further comprehensive replies to matter raised.
At 18.41, Cllr. D. Lyons took Chair of the Meeting, Cllr. N. McNelis resumed the Chair at 18.44.
4 (f) Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy (RSES)/ Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan
(MASP)
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services gave a detailed update in relation to the RSES.
4 (g) Quarterly Status Report — Service Level Agreement between Galway City Council &
Galway Cultural Development & Activity CLG TIA Galway 2020
Deferred.
6
4 (h) Quarterly Reports for quarter ending 30th September, 2018
(i) Environment
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
(iii) Transportation
(iv) Housing
(v) Community, Culture & Economic Development
Items 4h (i),(ii),(iii),(iv)&(v) deferred to Special meeting.
3 (b) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 6th September 2018
The Chief Executive referred to the Minutes of the Procedures Committee Meeting where it
was agreed that it will be proposed to the full Council that as there is generally unused monies
in the Conference / Seminar / Approved Training Budget at the end of the year, the allocation
of €3,022.00 be increased to €4,500. The allocation of €700 to a maximum of €1,000 for
Conferences is to remain unchanged. Any Councillor exceeding the maximum of €4,500 may
request another Councillor to transfer a portion of their allocation to them. It was also agreed
that any Councillor who has exceeded their maximum claims and does not submit their claim
within one month of the event will not get paid. Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that each
Councillors be notified of details on monies spent and balances remaining. It was agreed that
applications be made to the Meetings Administrator for any unspent monies.
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
"Approval of the Recommendations of the Procedures Committee per Minutes of Meeting
Thursday 6th September under Agenda Item Conferences / Seminars / Approved Training".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
A discussion was held regarding Area Committee Meetings. The establishment of Area
Committees for Galway City Council was agreed by resolution at the Ordinary Council Meeting
of Monday 11th June 2018. Payment of this Allowance will be made on the establishment of
Area Committees and once a meeting has taken place in the areas. The amount of allowance
payable for 2018 to a Member shall be calculated on a pro rata basis for the period from date
that Elected Members became Members of an Area Committee i.e. 11th June 2018. Payment
will be on a quarterly basis in arrears with the annual fixed Travel. Councillors requested that
an Area Committee Meeting be scheduled.
The Chief Executive referred to two recent events in City Hall on 17th October 2018: The
Lorient Twin City event where a "Sailing Cruise in Company" Galway City to Lorient July 2019
& Lorient to Galway City July 2020 was announced. The visit of a Chinese delegation from
Huzhou, China who also met with the Industrial Development Authority (IDA) & Galway Mayo
Institute of Technology.
7
5. NOTICES OF MOTIONS
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
Not Considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We
call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil no ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun
cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
8
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
Not Considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland
and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a
Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to
air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This
should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs
to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment
from taxpayer money"
Not Considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Slf Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered.
9
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
' 'That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not Considered.
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement
of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr.
Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of
Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
NOM 8/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the HSE
to review the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in chronic
pain, outside those experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-december
status while this review is being undertaken."
Not Considered.
10
NOM 9/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend
to direct hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit
and VAT charge it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our
budget.
Not Considered.
NOM 10/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of the
indigenous people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental
rights and has refused to comply with international law; noting also that Israel continues to
illegally occupy and colonise Palestinian land, discriminates against Palestinian citizens of
Israel, imposes an inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza and denies Palestinian refugees the
right to return to their homes, Galway City Council fully supports and endorses the
Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement for freedom, equality and
justice and commits itself to discontinue all business contracts it has with Hewlett-Packard,
both HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise for business and government services, as well as
the HP spin-off DXC Technology as HP and DXC provide and operate much of the technology
infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its system of apartheid and settler colonialism over
the Palestinian people.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on
students, and on the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also -Agrees
that increased housing for students will relieve demand on housing across the city; and also -
Recognises the need for additional housing to serve the city's student population; and further
-Calls on the minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government for the implementation of
limits on increases in student housing rents, in particular in areas that are designated as Rent
Pressure Zones; and -Pending such regulations, calls on housing providers within the City to
limit fee increases for student housing to the percentage rates allowed for Rent Pressure
Zones; and -Directs the Chief Executive of the Council to forward copies of the motion to the
Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, and also to the Minister for Education
and Skills. Further to forward copies to the Presidents of NUIG and GMIT.
Not Considered.
11
NOM 12/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council introduce changing places bathrooms that are accessible for all
wheelchair users, which will include a height adjustable changing bench, hoist, and enough
space for the person with a disability and up to two carers. And further that Galway City
Council would incorporate the requirement for these facilities in future Planning Conditions
for all major developments.
Response to NOM 12/18 issued to all Councillors on 22nd October 2018.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically
demand the Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release
immediately all Falun Gong practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not Considered
NOM 15/18 - Section 34 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Date Received:
9th July 2018
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Council
Development Plan 2017 — 2023 on lands at Ballybrit (adjacent to the Old Monivea Road). I
formally request a rezoning of O.IHa of land from "l" (Industrial) to "Cl" (Commercial /
Industrial) as per the hatched area in the Attached Map. Note this request is effectively
extending the Cl zoning to cover the entire land parcel as shown in Light Blue on the attached
Map"
Not Considered
NOM 16/18 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
9th October 2018
Date Received:
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Development
Plan 2017-2023. This motion relates to a site which is the location of the former Corrib Great
Southern Hotel adjacent to the Dublin Road, Galway. The area of the subject site is
approximately 2.7 hectares and is outlined in red below. The purpose of this motion is to
request a variation to the development plan which would include for a new site-specific
development objective for this site. This development objective would allow the entire site to
be developed for residential purposes and would also refer to the provision of a convenience
supermarket.
The lands are currently zoned 'Cl - Enterprise, light industry and commercial uses' which only
allows for a small element of residential development in the context of the development of
the site as a whole. The property has been derelict for approximately 10 years and the only
viable solution for the redevelopment of the site is for a predominantly residential
12
development including a convenience supermarket. The current zoning and site-specific zoning
objective does not permit this type of development.
A variation to the City Development Plan which included for a new site-specific zoning objective
would enable the site to be developed and would result in a development which delivers a
large quantity of residential units. Map attached.
Not Considered
NOM 17/18 Notice given by: Cllr. D. McDonnell
9th October 2018
Date Received:
"l, Councillor Declan McDonnell wish to propose a Variation to the Galway City Development
Plan 2017-2023. This motion relates to lands located in Renmore adjacent to Renmore Road,
Galway. The purpose of this motion is to request a variation to the zoning of 0.05 Hectares
(Ha) from 'RA' (Recreation and Amenity) to 'R' (Residential).
The subject lands extend to approximately 0.05 Ha in size and forms part of an overall site
comprising approx. 0.299 Ha (See Figure 1 below). The current Galway City Development Plan
2017-2023 indicates that the site is zoned part 'R: Residential' and part IRA: Recreational and
Amenitv. The 'R' zoning designation applies to approximately 83% of the subject site (2477
sqm) while the remaining 17% is zoned 'RA' (510 sqm). Request and map attached.
Not Considered
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
2nd January, 2018.
Date Received:
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to
the Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these
meetings and what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered
7. ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
1) Correspondence dated 18th September 2018 received from Sligo County Council outlining
resolution unanimously agreed - Copy attached.
Noted.
8. CONFERENCES
Conferences & Training were proposed by Cllr. N. McNelis and seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell
and approved.
13
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
1)
2)
3)
4)
Title: Towards a Hard Brexit and its Consequences
Date: 26th 27th & 28th October, 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Billy Cameron
Title: Let's Talk Tourism
Date: 9th November 2018
Venue: Great Southern Killarney
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Niall McNelis
Title: Social Media & Effective Time Management
Date: 9th - 11th November 2018
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
Title: Let's Get Talking 'Mental Health in the Workplace & Wider Community'
Date: 24th November 2018
Venue: The Connaught Hotel, Dublin Road, Galway
Title: Entitlement to Health Services
Date: 23rd, 24th & 25th November 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
Approved Training
Title: Town Planners: People, Place & Participation Conference
Date: 11th & 12th October 2018
Venue: Carlow
Title: AILG Module 5 — Local Authority Finance & Budgeting, Budget Preparation and
key decisions for the Elected Members in the Budget Process & A Briefing on the
Elected Members Gratuity Scheme
Date & Venue: 11th October, 2018 — Longford Arms Hotel
Date & Venue: 13th October, 2018 — Sligo Park Hotel
Date & Venue: 18th October, 2018 — Radisson Blu Hotel, Limerick
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. John Walsh, Cllr. Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr.
Colette Connolly
Title: AILG Autumn Training Seminar 2018
Date: 25th & 26th October 2018
Venue: Hillgrove Hotel, Old Armagh Road, Monaghan
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. John Walsh, Cllr.
Pearce Flannery, Cllr. Ollie Crowe, Cllr. Billy Cameron & Cllr. Colette Connolly
Title: Local Authorities Budgets 2019
Date: 16th 17th & 18th November 2018
Venue: Silver Tassie Hotel, Letterkenny
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mrs. Teresa Crowe, RIP
Mrs. Tess Power, RIP
Ms. Maura Varley, RIP
Mr. Martin Carroll, RIP
Ms. Nora Faherty, RIP
Mr. Keith O Hanlon, RIP
Mr. Jimmy Nally, RIP
Ms. Bridie Flanagan, RIP
Mrs. Peggy Fallon, RIP
Ms. Jackie O Hara Wallace, RIP
Ms. Agnes Wade, RIP
Ms. Lorna Manogue, RIP
Mr. Ciaran Cahill, RIP
Ms. Annie Conlon, RIP
Ms. Peggy Keane, RIP
Mrs. Patricia Cummins, RIP
Mr. Vincent McNelis, RIP
Mr. sean Farrell, RIP
Mrs. Jackie Gannon, RIP
Mr. Patrick Bannon, RIP
Mr. John Willie Costello, RIP
Mrs. Brid Grealish, RIP
Mrs. Bernadette Derrane, RIP
Mr. John McDonagh, RIP
Mrs. Rita Keenan, RIP
Mr. Johnny Brogan, RIP
Ms. Angela McSharry, RIP
The Mayor and Deputy Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to
ethose recently bereaved including the members of staff of Galway City Council who were
recently bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Mr. John Norman
Mr. Sean Neary
Garda Maria Freeley
Garda Reserve Alan Burke
Mr. Diarmuid O h'Aodh
Mr. Jeffrey Lynskey
Mr. David Henry
15
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Cllr. D. Lyons requested that a Notice of Motion be considered by Members as follows:
Proposed: Cllr. Donal Lyons Seconded: Cllr. Frank Fahy
"Galway City Council to direct Eir to carry out immediately a safety audit of all EIR / all
service providers junction boxes located on footpaths in the Galway City and where
necessary repairs to be carried out in the interest of pedestrian health and safety"
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Mayor McNelis advised that Notices of Motions submitted by Cllr. M. Lohan, Cllr. C. Connolly
& Cllr. D. McDonnell be considered at the start of the November Ordinary Meeting. This was
agreed.
firmed & Signed
Mayor' of Galway
16