Presiding:
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 26th November, 2018,
at 2pm in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. D. Lyons, Deputy Mayor
Councillors: B. Cameron, C. Ö Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J.
Crowe, O. Crowe, M.Cubbard, F. Fahy, P. Flannery, M. Farrell, P. Keane, M.
Lohan, D. Lyons, D. McDonnell, T.O'Flaherty and J. Walsh.
. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr
T. Connell, Director of Services
R. McNally, Director of Services
Ms.
. D. Mahon, A/ Director Of Services
Mr
Ms.
G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator
C. Kilcoyne, Senior Engineer
Ms.
S. Langan, A/Senior Executive Engineer
Mr.
. H. McDonagh, Administrative Officer
Ms
. A. Finn, A/ Administrative Officer
G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
MS.
Councillors N. Larkin, N. McNelis.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Deputy Mayor D. Lyons proposed that the meeting would finish at 6pm as previously proposed, with
no extension, and dealing with reports in order of the agenda. Cllr. P. Conneely proposed that the
Galway2020 report under item V) Community, Culture and Economic Development be taken at
5.00pm. This was seconded by Cllr. C. Connolly and agreed.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
The Galway2020 report under item V) Community, Culture and Economic Development be taken
at 5.00pm.
In Favour: 7 Against: O Abstain: 2 Present: 9
The Motion was passed
1
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
1. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
a) Quarterly Reports for Quarter ending 30th September 2017
(i) Environment
Deputy Mayor Lyons referred to the September 2018 Quarterly Report for Environment and invited
comments or clarification from Councillors.
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included:
Use of CCTV in monitoring and costs associated illegal dumping; the mattress amnesty; water status
in Ballyloughan; busking bye-laws; draft bye-laws on waste segregation and presentation; locations
cleared under Anti-Dumping Initiative 2018; solar bins; prevention/ removal of gum litter and graffiti;
European Green Leaf; Air quality monitoring project; oil spill plan; energy generation from canals;
dog fouling fines; Climate Change; Recycling targets and waste segregation; Hazardous waste
collections; Japanese knotweed; Fines for derelict sites; coastal protection project from Lough
Rusheen to Salthill; noise pollution; bulky goods collection service; fire station; landscaping on
Eglington Canal; banning of election posters; Report on Corrib Navigation.
Cllr. M Farrell complimented the bulky goods collection service
Cllr. F. Fahy complimented Mr. S. Langan on recent work undertaken by Lough Corrib Navigation
Trust.
Mr. S. Langan and Mr G. Mc Mahon provided comprehensive replies to Councillors queries.
Mr. S. Langan, A/ Senior Executive Engineer gave a detailed update on a number of environmental
queries, including CCTV use and installation in line with GDPR; the Mattress Amnesty; water status
at Ballyloughane and Grattan Beaches; future work planned under Anti-Dumping initiatives subject
to funding; solar bins; the oil spill plan; Climate Change Adaptation Plan; Japanese knotweed; the air
quality pilot with the EPA; works planned by the Corrib Navigation Trust; fines and procedures under
Derelict Sites and noise pollution. Mr. S. Langan advised that the Draft Bye-Laws on Waste Storage
and Presentation would come before the SPC this week for review, and recommendation. It is hoped
that the implementation of these bye-laws would resolve issues relating to household and
commercial waste.
Mr. G. McMahon advised that the Galway Waterways report and recommendations are currently
with the Senior Management Team for review. Mr. B. McGrath advised of the need to ensure the
report speaks to actions under CFRAMS. Mr. McMahon advised that the Busking Bye-Laws were
subject to legal advice. Regarding Derelict Sites, Mr. McMahon advised on the status of individual
sites.
2
Mr B. McGrath advised that the Act provides for a single contract debt, eventually registered against
the title, which is only paid when the title is disposed of. Mr. B. McGrath advised that figures re fines
for illegal dumping will be collated and notified to Cllr. C. Connolly. Mr. B. McGrath advised that CCTV
would not be rolled out further until the CCMA issued advice to local authorities on role as Data
Holders.
Mr. D. Mahon advised that the draft Annual Service Plan for 2019 would be presented to Council in
January and would reflect the issues raised by Council. The Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
would be presented to Council in 2019.
Proposed: Cllr. B. Cameron Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
Galway City Council calls on the DOEHLG to institute a tax on gum in order to fund Local Authorities
in the combatting (of) the scourge of gum litter in major cities.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed
Cllr. P. Keane proposed a motion that the Chief Executive shall sign a commencement order to allow
the busking and street performance bye-laws to be implemented as a matter of urgency. The motion
was seconded by Cllr. T. O'Flaherty. Mr. B. McGrath recommended reviewing the motion at the
December meeting. The motion was deferred.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
That the Chief Executive would meet with the Appropriate Officer in the Department of Housing,
Planning and Local Government - Marine & Foreshore Unit, to establish the reasons for the delay
in granting the foreshore licence for the coastal protection project — Sailin to Sliverstrand and that
the CE would report back to Council on the matter in due course.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was unanimously passed.
(ii) Recreation & Amenity
Deputy Mayor Lyons referred to the September 2018 Quarterly Report for Recreation & Amenity and
invited comments or clarification from Councillors.
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included:
Rollout of playgrounds; floodlights in recreation facilities; Westside Boxing Club parking issues; Cluain
Mhuire Running facility; Cemetery provision on East side of city; Grasscutting and apprenticeship
scheme; Ballinfoile Community Centre; Part 8 for Kingston and South Park; Crematorium; Facilities
for older children in the City; Westside Running Track; Byelaws on Open Space; Salthill Prom and
3
lighting from Blackrock to the Caravan Park; Shantana Neighbourhood Park; Toilets at Silver Strand;
Colaiste na Corribe pitch; environmental schemes such as the Boiler Replacement scheme; allocation
of pitch licences; mini master plan for Renmore; Bohermore Garden for older People; Seasonal staff
in Westside; kiosk rental in Salthill; Corrib Park; Future Floral Project; Millennium Park and graffiti in
parks; meeting with Grattan Park; timeline on development of Blackrock; sponsorship of
roundabouts; Renmore playground.
Councillors complimented Recreation and Amenity on work undertaken in Crestwood Park and
Melody's Field, and on works at Merlin College.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Executive Engineer provided comprehensive replies to Councillors queries and
gave a detailed update on a number of queries. Mr U. Finn advised that floodlighting of pitches would
require planning permission, but there is a commitment to progress same. Issues re the Boxing Club
could be discussed through the Local Area Committee meeting for the Central Ward in due course.
Site investigation works are on-going regarding a new cemetery. There is a national objective to
eliminate knotweed, which Galway City Council will support. Kingston will continue to Part VIII next
year, subject to funding. A workshop was held with Councillors re: bus priority through the hospital,
through recreation and amenity lands, and space for the helipad. A full update will be provided at
the December meeting. Other issues arising were also discussed.
Mr. B. McGrath also responded to Councillors' queries.
Proposed: Cllr. F. Fahy Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty
That Galway City Council bring forward a plan to eliminate Japanese knotweed within the City
Boundary as other Councils Nationwide have done.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. O. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
To bring forward a detailed report for recreation and amenity quarterly report in March 2019 on
all our playgrounds across the city to include what investment has taken place since Jan '16 with a
view to enhancing each and every one of our playgrounds.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was passed.
4
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
That GCC hold a consultative workshop in Shantalla in relation to the Galway Transportation City
Centre Plan including HSE helicopter pad (08698 access) which does not have planning permission,
Galway Transportation Strategy Plan to take over 0.629 acres of the neighbourhood park to facilitate
an internal bus route through UCHG and facilitate residents' questions regarding same.
In Favour: 12 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 12
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. T. O'Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
I propose a letter of thanks be sent to Mr Tom Donohue for his long service and commitment to
Galway City Council.
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain:
The Motion was passed.
Present: 13
Deputy Mayor Lyons noted at 5.00pm that it was earlier resolved to have the Galway2020
presentation at this time. Cllr. F. Fahy proposed to take the presentation at this time, and all agreed.
(iii) Community, Culture & Economic Development
Ms. P. Philbin, CEO of Galway2020 made a presentation, which included updates on the delivery
path of the programme, engagement, monitoring and evaluation and audience development.
Deputy Mayor Lyons invited clarifications and questions.
A synopsis of comments, queries and clarifications raised by Councillors included:
Linkages with sports clubs and schools; Funding structures; Rebranding; Audience development
including marginalised areas; Appointment of an Irish Officer; Legacy programme of Galway2020;
Governance Structures; the Galway2020 Board and Communications. A number of Councillors
welcomed the appointment of Ms. P. Philbin and congratulated her on her role.
Ms. P. Philbin and Mr. B. McGrath responded comprehensively to all queries raised. Mr. B. McGrath
outlined that Galway2020 would be an amazing year with economic gain in 2020 and for the years
following, particularly for Cultural Tourism where the impact of Capital of Culture ranged from 10-
11% at the lower end of the scale, up to 30% at the higher end. Every additional 70 visitors to
Galway is anticipated to equate to one additional job in the local economy.
The Meeting concluded at 6.00pm.
& Signed
Mi
Mayor' c/
5