Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 11th June, 2018 at 2.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
T. Connell, Director of Services
Ms. E. McCormack, Director of Services
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services
Mr. L. Blake, Senior Executive Planner
Mr. J. Doody, Executive Planner
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer
Mr. M. O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer
Mr. S. Walsh, Senior Executive Parks Superintendent
Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
Cllr. C. Connolly
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the Meeting in
line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Note: The Minutes of the Meeting and Agenda Items are recorded in the order of their
consideration.
Mayor Flannery proposed that the meeting conclude at 8.45pm with a break at 6.00pm for 45
minutes. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and a vote was taken:
In Favour: 13 Against: 1 Present: 14
It was then decided that a break be taken at 6.00pm for 20 minutes.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Present: 14
The Motion was agreed.
1
40) (i) - (vi) - BREXIT
It was recommended by the Mr. McGrath, C.E. that Item Nos. 4(j) (i) — (vi) be removed from the
Agenda as the matters had been discussed in the Presentation given by Professor Alan Ahearne in
the Council Chamber on 11th June 2018.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'That Item No. 4(j) (i) — (vi) be taken off the Agenda'
The Motion was agreed.
It was proposed by Cllr. B. Cameron to take the following two motions under S. 34 of the Standing
Orders & without debate. This was seconded by Cllr. N. McNelis.
Proposed: Cllr. Billy Cameron Seconded: Cllr. Niall McNelis
"The state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental rights and has refused to comply with
international law; noting also that Israel continues to illegally occupy and colonise Palestinian land,
discriminates against Palestinian citizens of Israel, imposes an inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza
and denies Palestinian refugees the right to return to their homes, Galway City Council fully supports
and endorses the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement for freedom, equality
and justice".
Mr. McGrath, C.E. advised that the motion put forward was not implementable as Galway City Council
operates within the laws of the state in relation to trade, procurement etc. A vote was taken.
In Favour: 11 Against: 3
Present: 14
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
t' That Galway City Council formally establish Area Committees by resolution as per Section 50(1) of
the Local Government Act 2001, as agreed by Procedures Committee on 28th May 2018".
Mr. McGrath, C.E. advised that this was not an emergency motion & is dealt with by way of inclusion
as part of the Procedures Committee. Clarification was also requested as to what business the
Elected Members want discussed at area committee meetings & advised that there would be a
resource issue.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Present: 14
The Motion was agreed.
2
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis Seconded: Cllr. T O'Flaherty
"That Galway City Council bring forward the time of the annual meeting on 15th June 2018 from
6.00pm to 4.00pm or 4.30pm".
A discussion took place on the changing of times of meetings & Mr. McGrath, C.E. clarified that
times of meetings can be re-visited under the current Standing Orders adopted in 2017. A vote was
taken to bring forward the time of the annual meeting to 4.00pm.
In Favour: 14 Against: O Present: 14
1. CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
1 (a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 14th May 2018.
Proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons the adoption of Minutes listed under Item I(a) and that any matters
arising or questions should be submitted in writing to the Meetings Administrator for response. This
was seconded by Cllr. D. McDonnell.
In Favour: 12 Against: 2
Present: 14
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
2 (a) Declaration of roads to be public roads — Maigh Burca, Ballymoneen Road, Galway.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"To declare the road at Maigh Burca, Ballymoneen Road, Galway to be a public road as per report
distributed 6th June 2018"
In Favour: 14 Against: O Present:14
2 (b) Consideration of Part VIII of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amendment —
Proposed development of 78 housing units at Ballyburke, Ballymoneen Road (Ard Cre Phase 2).
Ms. P. Philbin, A/D.O.S. gave a description of the proposed development & a breakdown of the
units as per the documentation circulated. Members were advised that this development would
contribute to the delivery of social housing targets and would involve an estimated spend of €13
million. Mr. McGrath, C.E. advised members that any potential conflict of interest should be
declared at this stage. Councillors welcomed the proposal & acknowledged the work of the
Housing & Planning Departments. Queries & concerns raised include; extra vehicular traffic, fear of
use as a 'rat run', child safety, will the tenant purchase scheme apply, exact figure on the housing
waiting list, are there any other lands in the area in the ownership of Galway City Council, would a
Voluntary Body be involved, will the scheme be subject to Part V, expected date of
commencement, would any future development to the north of Ard Cre have its own access onto
Ballymoneen Road, would changes to the Part VIII affect any current planning applications, query
3
regarding car parking spaces; was there any communication with area Councillors by the Housing /
Planning Departments re vehicular linkage, would changes to the Part VIII delay building.
Ms. P. Philbin, A/D.O.S. answered questions raised.
Mr. L.
Affordable Housing Scheme does not apply at present.
Other lands in Ballyburke are in the ownership of Galway City Council but no plans to
develop.
Lands at Ballymoneen Road — Keeraun site — in discussions with the Department.
The scheme will be subject to Part V.
Ard Cré site is subject to tenant purchase, in accordance with the requirements of the
Department.
Tender date in August 2018 — contract to site in January 2019 with a completion date of July
2020.
No voluntary body involved.
Parking is in accordance with Urban Housing Guidelines 2018. The car parking requirement
is the same for social / private housing.
Blake, Senior Planner commented on access to the proposed estate and advised that the
linkages are in accordance with the Development Plan. It encourages pedestrian & cycle use.
Clarified that the linkages are not alleyways & are designed to discourage anti-social behavior.
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer displayed a map of the development on screen & highlighted
the linkage. He advised that there would be a small number of vehicular movements between
estates.
Ms. C. Phelan, A/D.O.S. pointed out that there is a large area of RA zoned land for use by the
general public of Knocknacarra area & vehicular movement would be incidental. Changes to the
Part VIII would have some implications on current planning applications.
Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. re-iterated what had been said by the planning officials, i.e. the development
as proposed is in accordance with the Development Plan. He also advised that area Councillors had
been consulted. The Development Plan was adopted in January 2017 for 6 years & Galway City
Council has a duty to comply with the Development Plan. This proposal fully accords with the
Development Plan and any changes to the proposal may have to go back to the Department for
approval.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
"The adoption of the Part 8 with the following amendment — that the pedestrian / vehicular access
to the proposed estate north of Ard Cré would be omitted in the interest of pedestrian security and
safety and peaceful life / child welfare of the future residents of the estate"
Absent: 3
In Favour: 13 Against: 2
The motion was passed.
2 (c) Consideration of Part VIII of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amendment and
pursuant to S. 85 of the Local Government Act, 2001 Agreement between Cork County Council
4
and Galway City Council July 2017 — for the delivery of a housing programme under a Public
Private Partnership of 74 housing units at Ballyburke, Ballymoneen Road.
Mayor Flannery stated that clarification from elected members could only be sought once. Cllr. D.
Lyons, Cllr. N. McNelis & Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir declared a potential interest in the proposed
development as they are members of the Board of Management of the School which adjoins the
site.
Ms. P. Philbin, A/D.O.S. outlined a description of the proposed development & a breakdown of the
units as per the documentation circulated. 72 submissions were received in relation to the
proposal. Mr. J. Doody, Executive Planner explained the content of the planner's report & advised
that the proposal is in accordance with the Development Plan & recommended that the access
point is retained.
Councillors welcomed the proposal. Queries & concerns raised include; the removal of access point
& the legal implications for the residents of An Maoilin, issue of non tenant purchase; legal advice
required, concern re cost of units to the Council
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
"To get legal advice on omitting laneways — would it have a knock on effect on the residents of An
Maoilfn"
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
'iTo accept the Part VIII, Ballyburke, PPP"
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
' 'To accept the Part VIII & remove the pedestrian access"
This proposal was withdrawn.
Mr. D. Mahon, S.E.O. Housing clarified matters on the housing waiting list:
Currently 4,150 on the waiting list
1,300 in receipt of Housing Assistance Payment (HAP), 150 in long term leasing scheme (LTL), 350 in
rental accommodation scheme (RAS), 1,800 in receipt of housing support, the balance of 2,350 in
need of housing. The Housing Needs Assessment closing date is 11th June 2018 & this would have
effect on the figures given.
Cllr. O Crowe believed that the reality of the housing list is in excess of 12,000, the figures given do
not include family numbers.
Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. brought to the attention of elected members that conditions attached to
planning register reference no. 11/105 cannot be complied with if an amendment is made to this
Part VIII. This scheme is part of a PPP bundle & there is a risk that the bundle will proceed without
Galway City Council, in the event of any undue delay.
5
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
'ITO adopt the plan as is"
The following motion was voted on:
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Seconded: Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
"That the Part VIII proposed under item 2(c) would proceed with the deletion / omission of the
pedestrian / cycleway linking the proposed development with the Estate at An Maoilin".
In Favour: 12
Against: 4
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane
Present: 16
Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded:
"That the Executive of Galway City Council would bring forward a report to Council for the possible
application to materially contravene the current city development plan to close off public alleyways
throughout the City "
In Favour: 16
Against: O
Present: 16
2 (d) Draft Annual Report 2017
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
"To adopt the Annual Report 2017 — per report circulated"
In Favour: 15 Against: O Present:15
The motion was agreed.
3. REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 8th March 2018
It was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons to defer Item 3(a) to the July Ordinary Council meeting.
Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To defer Item 3(a) Report from Procedures Committee of Thursday 8th March 2018 to the July
Ordinary Council Meeting'.
This was agreed.
6
3(b) Report from Procedures Committee of Monday 28th May 2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Seconded: Cllr. P. Conneely
'To defer Item 3(b) Report from Procedures Committee of Monday 28th May 2018 to the July
Ordinary Council Meeting'.
This was agreed.
The matter of Area Committee Meetings was raised at this stage & it was agreed that one formal
meeting per year be held. There will be 3 area committees, 1 for each ward to deal with LIS &
other matters commencing from the 11th June 2018.
4. CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
4(b) Draft Recreation & Amenity Masterplan for Kingston
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. T. O'Flahery
'It was proposed to take Item No. 4(b) as a representative for Cunnane Stratton Reynolds was in the
gallery.
This was agreed.
Mr. Keith Mitchell from Cunnane Stratton Reynolds made a presentation to the Chamber as per
documentation circulated June 2018. Councillors thanked Mr. Mitchell and the staff of the
Recreation & Amenity Department for their hard work and expressed their positive views on the
Masterplan. Queries raised included the need for lighting; could dressing rooms be incorporated;
concerns re noise from the games; too many car parking spaces; consideration be given to a sand
base pitch.
Mr. Mitchell & Mr. Walsh replied to queries and clarifications raised in detail.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Keane
Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
'That Galway City Council adopt the Landscape Concept Masterplan for Kingston as set out at item
4(b) on Council Agenda 11.06.2018 as per attached map, and that the Executive would proceed
with a Part VIII application firstly on the property currently owned by Galway City Council and
thereafter as additional land is acquired by Galway City Council (i.e. in the appropriate stages)'.
In Favour: 14
Against: O
Present: 14
7
4(a) Consultation Document, Local Government Funding (Baseline) Review — Methodology
for the Allocation of Local Government Funding.
Ms. E. McCormack spoke on this matter and will be co-ordinating the submission. Elected members
were advised they could also make an individual submission. Discussion took place and concerns
raised included impact from a possible amalgamation between Galway City Council & Galway
County Council; amount of funding; document provided is vague; financial situation of Galway
County Council to be looked at; would the renewal of pedestrianisation or grass cutting be grounds
for submission; decision date.
Mayor P. Flannery left the Chamber at 5.15pm & Cllr. M. Cubbard took the Chair.
Ms. E. McCormack replied to questions raised & offered to meet / discuss matters with Councillors.
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
'To hold a workshop for the Consultation Document, Local Government Funding (Baseline) Review —
Methodology for the Allocation of Local Government Funding'.
In Favour: 15
Against: O
Present: 15
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
'To submit the one submission on behalf of all elected members'
In Favour: 15
Against: O
Present: 15
Mayor P. Flannery returned to the Chair at 5.30pm.
The Council rose for a break at 5:35pm and resumed the meeting at 6:00pm.
4(c) Consideration of National Planning Framework & 4(d) Consideration of National
Development Plan 2018 - 2027
It was agreed to take Item Nos. 4(c) & 4(d) together. Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. spoke on the National
Planning Framework & its National Strategic outcomes & priorities of the National Development
Plan. Two very important funds for Galway i.e. Local Infrastructure Housing Activation Fund (LIHAF)
& Rural Regeneration & Development Fund. These are vital for Galway & critical to such projects as
Ardaun, Galway Transport Strategy, including Galway Ring Road, Broadband, Gaeltacht Service
town, Bus Connect Projects, Ceannt Station, Galway Port, Crown Site, Headford Road Site, Nuns
Island and delivery will be key.
It was agreed to take Item No. 4(i) at this stage.
Councillors thanked the C.E. for his presentation. Discussion took place and concerns raised
include, certainty of funding, under resourced in staff in both city & county authorities, certainty of
savings from amalgamation, large number of elected members — loss of democratic voice, need for
Greenway from Oranmore to Connemara, infrastructure not being utilised i.e. Galway Airport.
C.E. clarified matters and answered questions raised. It was agreed that an update on the
Connemara Greenway would be provided for the July meeting.
8
4(h) To agree arrangements to receive an update in relation to Galway 2020 from the
Company
Discussion took place on whether this update would be provided by the C.E. of Galway 2020 at a
special sitting of the Community & Culture SPC or full council meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Flannery Seconded: Cllr. O. Crowe
'To hold a special council meeting on the 19th June 2018 at 5.00pm to receive an update on Galway
2020'.
In Favour: 9
Against: 7
Present: 16
The motion was passed.
4(e) Chief Executive's Report for May 2018 & 4(f) Chief Executive's Report for June 2018
C.E. was thanked for both reports for May & June. Items discussed included, Seafest, Twinning of
William Butler Yeats, Strategic Plan & review of Town Hall, Discovery Centre, Solar Bins were
welcomed, state of footpaths with gum / litter, need for better communication from Irish Water,
Mayors Awards, progress on Blue Flag for Ballyloughane Beach, painting of Blackrock Tower, poor
state of grass cutting in City, proposed works on Shop Street. It was agreed to discuss these reports
further at the July meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
'To congratulate Mr. Peter Salmon for being an excellent Secretary to the Joint Policing Committee'.
This was agreed.
4(g) Christmas Market 2017
It was agreed to discuss at July meeting.
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllr. P. Flannery
'That Galway City Council meeting chamber will be a single use plastic free zone'.
In Favour: 9
Against: O
The motion was agreed.
Present: 9
9
5. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to
intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the harbour
a uthorities".
Not Considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister
Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that children have
access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and conditions for
professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate children
during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive high quality care
and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified professionals are struggling to
make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We call on Minister Zappone to put
children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer Scheme as
regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for enrolment in
FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically excluded from the
scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this Council considers it of the
upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young people to get involved in farming
activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as possible"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Otlscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar an
gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil no ar a toil ag
Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun cinn mar
chathair dhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
10
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
'Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and in doing
so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek flexibility from the
European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to financing of social housing".
Not Considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condemns the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between 2009
and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the Company can
continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland and between urban
centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the Western
Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a Smart Region
approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities".
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any matches
broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to air television in
order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This should be done in
order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs to the Irish people and
has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment from taxpayer money".
Not Considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate bus
licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing estates Sli
Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na Farraige, Drisfn and
Mhaoilin located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered.
11
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a new
criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and defibrillators"
Not Considered.
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming increasingly
unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious affordable rental and
purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where appropriate, Approved Housing
Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets for all local authorities; and to Design
the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise loan finance to small and medium sized
builders participating in Council led affordable housing schemes".
Not Considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will "honour our
commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement of the conflict".
Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr. Simon Coveney T.D. to
join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of Palestine, compromising of Gaza,
West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
NOM 8/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
13th April, 2018
"Galway City Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon Harris, to request the HSE to
review the decision to restrict the use of Versatis pain relief patches to patients, in chronic pain,
outside those experiencing post herpetic neuralgia. And to revert to the pre-december status while
this review is being undertaken."
Not Considered.
12
NOM 9/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council will, in earnest, work to convert the large outsourcing contractor spend to
direct hires. As contractors are more expensive to the city taxpayer as they require a profit and VAT
charge it is of direct and indirect benefit to reduce the outsourcing deficit from our budget.
Not Considered.
NOM 10/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Since its violent establishment in 1948 through the ethnic cleansing of more than half of the
indigenous people of Palestine, the state of Israel has denied Palestinians their fundamental rights
and has refused to comply with international law; noting also that Israel continues to illegally
occupy and colonise Palestinian land, discriminates against Palestinian citizens of Israel, imposes an
inhumane blockade and siege of Gaza and denies Palestinian refugees the right to return to their
homes, Galway City Council fully supports and endorses the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment
and Sanctions movement for freedom, equality and justice and commits itself to discontinue all
business contracts it has with Hewlett-Packard, both HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise for
business and government services, as well as the HP spin-off DXC Technology as HP and DXC
provide and operate much of the technology infrastructure that Israel uses to maintain its system
of apartheid and settler colonialism over the Palestinian people.
Not Considered.
NOM 11/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
22nd April, 2018
Galway City Council recognises that current housing shortages have a negative impact on students,
and on the future development of the city's third level institutions; and also -Agrees that increased
housing for students will relieve demand on housing across the city; and also -Recognises the need
for additional housing to serve the city's student population; and further -Calls on the minister for
Housing, Planning and Local Government for the implementation of limits on increases in student
housing rents, in particular in areas that are designated as Rent Pressure Zones; and -Pending such
regulations, calls on housing providers within the City to limit fee increases for student housing to
the percentage rates allowed for Rent Pressure Zones; and -Directs the Chief Executive of the
Council to forward copies of the motion to the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local
Government, and also to the Minister for Education and Skills. Further to forward copies to the
Presidents of NUIG and GMIT.
Not Considered.
13
NOM 12/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council introduce changing places bathrooms that are accessible for all wheelchair
users, which will include a height adjustable changing bench, hoist, and enough space for the
person with a disability and up to two carers. And further that Galway City Council would
incorporate the requirement for these facilities in future Planning Conditions for all major
developments.
Not Considered.
NOM 13/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government to ratify, as soon as possible, The Convention
against Trafficking in Human Organs which was adopted by the Council of Europe on 9 July 2014 in
order to criminalise illegal organ transplantations. The Irish Government has already signed this
convention, but is yet to ratify it.
Not Considered.
NOM 14/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
5th June, 2018
Galway City Council calls on the Irish Government, as a matter of urgency to emphatically demand
the Chinese Government to cease the persecution of Falun Gong and release immediately all Falun
Gong practitioners and other prisoners of conscience from detention.
Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to the
Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these meetings and
what are the long term plans of UCH?"
14
7.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Items 7(a) to (h) were noted.
(a) Correspondence dated 8th May 2018 from James J. Browne, Ph.D., D.Sc., MRIA, C.Eng.
Professor Emeritus
Re: Letter of thanks for Civic Reception held in his honour - Copy attached
(b) Correspondence dated 9th May 2018 from Department of Housing, Planning and Local
Government
Re: Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in Galway — Copy
attached
(c) Thank you card from Patrick Grealish, Water Services Section
Re: Thank you for expression of sympathy following death of Mr. Grealish's wife Eileen R.I.P.
- Copy attached
(d) Motion passed by the Members of Waterford City & County Council at the May Council
Meeting
Re: "That Waterford City & County Council calls on the Minister of Health to include those
that are not Children or Young Adults in the provision by the HSE of Free Style Libre to
sufferer's of Type 1 Diabetes" — Copy attached.
(e) Motion passed by the Members of Waterford City & County Council at the May Council
(f)
(g)
Meeting
Re: t 'That Waterford City & County Council calls on the Department of Education & Skills
and/or Department of Health to introduce a scheme to provide all teachers & Special Needs
Assistants (who are physically able) with Occupational First Aid training, encompassing CPR"
— Copy attached.
Motion passed by the Members of Waterford City & County Council at the May Council
Meeting
Re: "That Waterford City & County Council calls on the Minister of Health, Deputy Simon
Harris to request the HSE to review the decision to restrict the use of versatis pain relief
patches, to patients who are in chronic pain, outside those who are experiencing post
herpetic neuralgia and to revert back to the pre December status while the review is being
undertaken" — Copy attached.
Motion passed by the Members of Waterford City & County Council at the May Council
Meeting
Re: "That Waterford City & County Council welcomes the statutory investigation into
Cervical Check announced by the Minister for Health. We request HIQA to consider
including in its terms of reference a lowering to twenty years to be the age of eligibility for
the screening service" — Copy attached.
Motion passed by the Members of South Dublin County Council at the May County Council
Meeting
Re: Expression of solidarity with the Palestinians & the unarmed peaceful protesters who
were shot at — Copy attached.
15
CONFERENCES
8.
It was proposed by Cllr. D. McDonnell and seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell and agreed by Councillors for
approval of attendance at the following Approved Training Events:
Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Approved Training
1)
2)
9.
Title: Institute of Professional Training, Public Private Partnerships! Opportunity or Threat?
Date: 8th 9th & 10th June 2018
Venue: Whitford House Hotel, Wexford
The following Councillor was approved to attend:
Cllr. Padraig Conneely
Title: AILG Module 3 — 'Irish Water and a Single Public Water Utility — A briefing for Elected
Members'
Date & Venue: 19th June, 2018 Brehon Hotel, Killarney
Date & Venue: 23rd June 2018, Crowne Plaza Hotel, Dundalk
Date & Benue: 28th June 2018, Great Northern Hotel, Bundoran
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. Padraig Conneely, Cllr. John Walsh, Cllr.
Michael Crowe, Cllr. Billy Cameron, Cllr. Noel Larkin & Cllr. Pearce Flannery.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Dr. John Heskin, R.I.P.
Mr. Martin Keane, R.I.P.
Mr. Padraic Small, R.I.P.
Mrs. Maureen Beatty, R.I.P.
Mrs. Mary Brennan, R.I.P.
Mr. Patrick McCormack, R.I.P.
Mr. Gerry Daniels, R.I.P.
Mr. Donal Bell, R.I.P.
Mrs. Alice Carroll, R.I.P.
Mr. Sean Prendergast, R.I.P.
Mrs. Millie Moore, R.I.P.
Mr. Kevin Manning, R.I.P.
Ms. Kitty O'Sullivan, R.I.P.
Mrs. Pauline Gallagher, R.I.P.
Mr. Brian McGoldrick, R.I.P.
Mr. Seamus Molloy, R.I.P.
Mrs. Helena Duffy, R.I.P
16
The Mayor and Deputy Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those
recently bereaved including the members of staff of Galway City Council who were recently
bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Chairman / Officers of Salthill Devon Football Club
Mr. Peter Salmon
Mr. Enda Kenny, T.D.
10. OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Mayor Flannery thanked everyone for the experience, challenge & courtesy during his term as
Mayor of Galway City.
Mr. B. McGrath, C.E. advised members of the departure of Ms. Edel McCormack, Head of Finance &
wished her well in her new post.
The meeting concluded at 8.45 p.m.
med & Signed
Mayor' of Galway
17
