Presidin :
Present:
In Attendance:
Apologies:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council
Held on Monday 27th March, 2018,
at 11.30 a.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway
Councillors: B. Cameron, P. Conneely, F. Fahy, D. Lyons, M. Lohan, D.
McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty, J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services
Ms. L. Mitchell, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer
Cllrs. C. 6 Conchüir, C. Connolly, M. Crowe, O. Crowe, M. Cubbard, M. Farrell,
P. Keane, N. Larkin
The Special Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery welcomed the Members to the Special meeting and thanked them for their
attendance to enable the City Council to discuss the motion on awarding a Civic Reception to
the Mayor of Chicago, Mr. Rahm Emanuel on the occasion of his visit to Galway City and in
recognition of the strong bond of friendship between the Sister Cities of Chicago and Galway
City.
The Mayor formally proposed the motion to Accord a Civic Reception under Standing Orders
no. 5 and 115 to honour Mr. Rahm Emanuel, Mayor of Chicago. The motion proposed to hold
this Civic Reception in the Galmont Hotel on Tuesday 3rd April 2018 at 4.00 p.m.
Councillors discussed the motion and were positive regarding the proposed event citing the
strong bond between the two cities, the hospitability afforded to former Mayors by Mayor
Emanuel and his predecessors. Items raised included costs involved regarding the proposed
event being held outside City Hall, the short time-line to proposed event and suggestion of
holding such future events in City Council community facilities.
Mr. McGrath responded to queries raised and advised that City Hall did not have sufficient
capacity to hold the upcoming proposed Reception and costs would be borne under the
Twinning budget.
This Motion was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and a vote was taken.
'To hold a Civic Reception in honour of Mr. Rahm Emanuel, Mayor of Chicago on Tuesday
3rd April 2018 at 4.00 p.m. in the Galmont Hotel'.
For: 10
Against: O
Present: 10
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Civic Reception as proposed.
The meeting concluded at 11.55 am.
ed & Signed
Mayor of Galway