Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 5th March, 2018 at 4.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Ms. E. McCormack, Director of Services,
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services,
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Mr. M. O' Donnell, Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery extended his sympathies to Mr. James Harrold, Galway City Council Arts
Officer on the death of his mother Mrs. Mary Harrold née Walsh, RIP followed by a minutes
silence as a mark of respect. Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services, Mr. B. McGrath, Chief
Executive and the Council as a collective offered condolences to James, his wife Dolores &
their extended family and Mr. Harrold's attendance at the meeting was acknowledged.
Mayor Flannery proposed that Item 4(1) Report & Recommendations on Arts Grants 2018 be
dealt with as first item on the agenda and this was agreed.
4(1) Report & Recommendations on Arts Grants 2018
Mr. J. Harrold paid tribute to his late mother.
Mr. Harrold referred Councillors to the report issued and to the recommendations for
allocation of funding under the 2018 Arts Grants. The report contained summary documents
of the recommendations for the allocation of funds under the Arts Acts. He informed the
meeting that the Arts Act Grant scheme for arts organisations operating in the City of Galway
was advertised in January and by the closing date 84 applications had been received.
Mr. Harrold outlined the process followed to assess each application by a committee which
comprises both internal and external assessors. It was noted that the Arts Funding Committee
under the Chairmanship of Cllr. P. Conneely met on the 28th February to consider applications
received and that the Committee had endorsed the proposal now before the Councillors.
1
Mr. Harrold confirmed that 75 organisations are recommended for funding in the amount of
€410,000 for 2018.
Councillors offered compliments to Mr. Harrold and the Arts Office for the report and for the
promotion of the arts in the City. Queries and clarifications were raised in relation to
organisations that were not included on the list, may not have received funding or had been
approved for a reduced amount in 2018.
Mr. Harrold issued replies to the queries raised and outlined in further detail the criteria for
allocating funding. Mr. Harrold also referred to other sources of funding and noted that the
Council would assist other groups to access other appropriate funding, where possible. Mr.
Harrold issued a reply to each query on particular applications under the fund. He noted that
he would work with those groups that may benefit from other sources of funding for both
business support and not for profit organisations.
Proposed: Cllr. P. Conneely
Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons.
'Approval of Arts Act Grants 2018 in the amount of €410,000' - per Report presented dated
5th March 2018.
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The allocation of funding under the Arts Act Grants 2018 was approved unanimously.
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Council Meeting conclude at 20.45 p.m. with the Council
rising for a 15 minute break at 19.30 p.m. He proposed to conclude any item under discussion
at 19.45 p.m., if necessary, and then take Item I(a) on the Agenda - Minutes of Ordinary
Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 12th February 2018. This proposal was
seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and agreed.
Mayor Flannery proposed the following order of business for the Meeting:
2(a) Event Licence St. Patrick's Day Parade - To consider;
2(b) Consideration of Part 8 - Kirwan Roundabout Upgrade — To consider;
3(c) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2018 - To note and agreed;
2(d) Scheme of Housing Letting Priorities/Allocations Scheme 2017 proposed amendments
— To defer as relevant staff were not available for this item;
Item 3(a) Report from CPG Meeting of Friday 2nd March and 3 (b) Report &
Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2018 - To consider as one item;
4(a) Consideration of National Planning Framework - To defer;
4(b) Consideration of National Development Plan 2018 — 2027 - To defer;
4(c) Proposed expansion of Galway City Council Museum;
4(d) Creative Ireland - "Creative Galway Plan 2018 — 2022" - To note;
4(e) Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for South Park &
4(f) Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for Kingston - To defer as the consultant or
relevant staff were not available. This running order was agreed.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed that a public meeting regarding Kingston could be held to deal with
queries. This was seconded by Cllr. D. Lyons and agreed.
2
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath proposed that the executive would meet with stakeholders
and bring back concerns to Councillors.
Cllr. F. Fahy proposed that Item 4(e) & 4(f) be dealt with at the April Council meeting and
be at the top of agenda under Business prescribed by statute, namely 4(a) & 4(b). This
proposal was seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron and a Vote was taken:
'Item 4(e) Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for South Park to be taken as Item 4(a)
on the agenda at April Council meeting under Business prescribed by statute'
In Favour: 11 Against: 6 Abstain: O Present: 17
This was agreed.
'Item 4(f) Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for Kingston to be taken as Item 4(b)
on the agenda at April Council meeting under Business prescribed by statute'
In Favour: 14 Against: 3 Abstain: O Present: 17
This was agreed.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed the noting of Item 4(o) Brexit. The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath
asked Councillors to consider leaving this important item on the agenda or to consider
referring same to the Strategic Policy Committee before noting same. Following this, Cllr.
Cubbard withdrew his proposal. Cllr. N. McNelis proposed that as the chair of the Economic
Development, Enterprise Support & Culture SPC to put the matter on the SPC agenda and
requested a more recent update on Brexit.
Mayor Flannery suggested the commencement of the April Council meeting at 2 p.m.
This was proposed by Cllr. P. Conneely and seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
In Favour: 13 Against: 4 Abstain: O Present: 17
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Event Licence St. Patrick's Day Parade - in accordance with the Planning and
Development Regulation 2015
'To Grant an event licence for St. Patrick's Day Parade 2018 - in accordance with the
Planning and Development Regulation 2015'
Proposed: Cllr. M. Crowe Seconded: Cllr. D. Lyons
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The event licence was granted.
3
(b) Consideration of Part 8 - B6thar na dTreabh (N6) - Multi Modal Corridor
Improvement Scheme Phase 7 - Kirwan Roundabout Upgrade
Mr. U. Finn, A/Director of Services presented to the Meeting outlining the nature and extent
of the proposed development. He confirmed that the option selection reviewed 15 options
and Mr. Finn proceeded to outline the option which has been advanced through the Part 8
process. Mr. Finn referred to the Report circulated to Councillors by the Planning Department
which outlines the benefits of the scheme, environmental considerations, internal/external
observations and a summary of submissions and responses. Mr. D. Delaney, Consultant,
CH2M Barry presented to the Meeting.
A lengthy discussion ensued and Councillors gave their views in support of and against the
proposed improvement scheme. Concerns were raised by a number of Councillors which
included the public consultation process, access to Coolagh, effect on the Menlo Park hotel
and access to the Collin's B&B on the N84 side of the Headford Road, just off the roundabout
and queries were raised if access via Sandyvale Lawn could be considered for this family.
Mr. McGrath advised that the access lands to Sandyvale Lawn are not in the ownership of
Galway City Council and that it is a matter for the landowners to consider consent to access.
He confirmed that any proposed access through the said land would materially contravention
the Development Plan and that should this be considered that a consultation process would
have to ensue to allow third parties to make submissions/objections to same.
Mr. D. Delaney, Mr. U. Finn and Ms. C. Phelan, Senior Planner gave detailed replies and
clarification to Councillors on matters raised.
Cllr. M. Cubbard proposed a motion "That we reject this Part 8 as before as for Bothar na
dTreabh (N6) Multi Model Corridor improvements. Scheme Phase 7 - Kirwan Roundabout
upgrade". This proposal was seconded by Cllr. M. Lohan.
Cllr. J. Walsh proposed an amendment to Cllr. Cubbard's motion "to propose the adoption of
Part 8 — Bothar na dTreabh — Multi Modal Corridor Improvement Scheme Phase 7 - Kirwan
Roundabout upgrade". This amendment was seconded by Cllr. N. Larkin.
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment is considered first.
'To adopt the Part 8 B6thar na dTreabh (N6) - Multi Modal Corridor Improvement Scheme
Phase 7 - Kirwan Roundabout Upgrade'
Proposed: Cllr. J. Walsh Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
Cllrs. C. Connolly, Cllr. F. Fahy & Cllr. M. Cubbard requested a roll call vote.
In Favour: IO: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N.
Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and Cllr. J. Walsh
Against: 8: Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M.
Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell and Cllr. M. Lohan
The amendment was affirmed.
4
In line with Standing Orders, the amendment is affirmed so the original Motion
disappears and the amendment becomes the original Motion.
The Motion was then voted on:
'To adopt thePart 8 B6thar na dTreabh (N6) - Multi Modal Corridor Improvement Scheme
Phase 7 - Kirwan Roundabout Upgrade'
Proposed: Cllr. J. Walsh Seconded: Cllr. N. Larkin
In Favour: IO: Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir, Cllr. P. Flannery, Cllr. P. Keane, Cllr. N.
Larkin, Cllr. D. Lyons, Cllr. D. McDonnell, Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and Cllr. J. Walsh
Against: 8: Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. C. Connolly, Cllr. M.J. Crowe, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. M.
Cubbard, Cllr. F. Fahy, Cllr. M. Farrell and Cllr. M. Lohan
The Part 8 was approved.
(c) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2018
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan 2018 be noted and
agreed. This was seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty.
(d) Scheme of Housing Letting Priorities/AIlocations Scheme 2017 — proposed amendments
Proposed: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell to defer Item 2(d) and agreed.
Mayor Flannery proposed that the Meeting rise at 19.20p.m. and resume at 19.45p.m. to deal
with Item 3(a) & (b) on the Agenda followed by Item I(a) Minutes of February Council
Meeting. This was agreed.
1.
3.
(b)
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 12th February
2018
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Report from CPG Meeting of Friday 2nd March
Noted
Report & Recommendations on Marketing Fund 2018 — Per Report Issued 05th March
2018.
Adopted
Mayor Flannery proceeded to take a Vote on the noting of Item 3(a) Report from CPG
Meeting of Friday 2nd March & the adoption of Item 3(b) Report & Recommendations on
Marketing Fund 2018 — per Report issued 05th March 2018:
In Favour: 11 Against: O Abstain: 1 Present: 12
Item 3(a) was noted and Item 3(b) was adopted.
5
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
Consideration of National Planning Framework
Deferred.
Consideration of National Development Plan 2018 - 2027
Deferred.
Proposed expansion of Galway City Council Museum
Mr. M. O' Donnell, SEO presented to the Meeting and gave an update on the proposed
expansion of Galway City Council Museum.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed to revise the Budget 2018 for €150,000 budget. This proposal was
seconded by Cllr. B. Cameron
A lengthy discussion ensued with contributions from a number of Councillors.
Mr. O' Donnell replied to queries raised and provided clarification on matters arising.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Proposed expansion of Galway City Council Museum
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 16
The Report was approved.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Creative Ireland - "Creative Galway Plan 2018 — 2022."
Noted.
Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for South Park
Deferred.
Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for Kingston
Deferred.
Chief Executive's Report for February 2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan and noted.
Chief Executive's Report for March 2018
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. M. Lohan and noted.
Update Report on the Dyke Road Site / Cultural Infrastructure Provision
Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014 - 2016
Final IBAL Anti-Litter Survey Results for 2017
Report & Recommendations on Arts Grants 2018
6
0)
(k)
5.
Report on Christmas Market 2017
Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements
in Galway
BREXIT
(i) Impacts / Preparation / Planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging
from Brexit
(iii) The view form Irish Local Government
NOTICE OF MOTIONS
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
Not Considered.
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
Not Considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We
call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered.
7
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. 6 Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
Not Considered.
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac sf deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil nö ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun
cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing".
Not Considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
'Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public transport services throughout rural Ireland
and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
Not Considered.
8
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the full
Council for consideration
Not Considered.
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a
Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to
air television in order to al'ow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This
should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs
to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment
from taxpayer money".
Not Considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Slf Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilfn located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not Considered.
9
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes".
Not Considered.
NOM 4/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council progress their plans for a bus lane on the R338 old Dublin Road
eastbound and that the bus lane be constructed on the hard shoulder adjacent to the R338
and that the R338 be widened to facilitate the Bus lane between the Corrib Great Southern
and the Martin Roundabout and that following a motion proposed at the Transportation SPC
on Monday 29th January 2018 by Cllr. Frank Fahy that officials would investigate the feasibility
of constructing a new entrance to Merlin Park Hospital at a point roughly midway between
the current entrance and the traffic lights at Galway Chrystal to minimise the damage to the
South Woods".
Not Considered.
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement
of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr.
Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of
Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18
Question given by: Cllr. N. McNelis
Date Received:
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to
the Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these
meetings and what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered.
10
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
7.
Items 7(a), (b) & (c) were noted.
(a)
(b)
8.
1)
1)
9.
Correspondence dated 9th February 2018 from Department of Housing, Planning &
Local Government
Re: Acknowledgement of Resolution by Galway City Council regarding the Tenant
Purchase Scheme & people with disabilities
Correspondence dated 19th February 2018 from Department of Housing, Planning &
Local Government
Re: Transboundary Environmental Public Consultation: Hinkley Point C nuclear power
plant — Bridgwater, Somerset, UK
Submission to Regional Spatial & Economic Strategy - NWRA - February 2018
CONFERENCES
Title: Celtic Conferences— New Affordable Houses Schemes
Date: 9th, 10th & 11th March 2018
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty / Cllr. Noel Larkin / Cllr. Niall McNelis / Cllr. Ollie Crowe
Approved Training
Title: LAMA 2018 Spring Training Seminar
Date: 6th & 7th April 2018
Venue: The Central Hotel, Donegal Town, Co. Donegal
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. N. McNelis, Cllr. B. Cameron, Cllr. O. Crowe, Cllr. P. Conneely, Cllr. F. Fahy and
Cllr. D. McDonnell
VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
Mrs. Ita Goldbey, R.I.P.
Mr. John Dempsey, .I.P.
Mrs. Sinead McGov n Hynes,
Mrs. Mary Cunningh
Mr. Vincent O'Sullivan, R.I.P.
Mr. Kieran Collins, R.I.P.
Mr. Robert Cyril Moloney, R.I.P.
Mrs. Gertie Brennan, R.I.P.
Mrs. Mary Fallon, R.I.P.
Mrs. Mary Mullins, R.I.P.
Mr. Martin Geary, R.I.P.
Mrs. Mary Coughlan, R.I.P.
11
10.
11.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer, Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director
of Services and the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave comprehensive replies to matters
arising, requests and clarifications sought. T
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Farrell and seconded by Cllr. P. Keane and agreed by Councillors
for approval of attendance at the following Conferences/Approved Training Events.
Ms. C. Kilcoyne presented a report to the Meeting on the recent severe weather events during
Storm Emma (Monday 26th February — Sunday 4th March 2018) including local co-ordination,
weather and high tides, response from Galway City Council including the Roads and Housing
departments, emergency calls/customer services and communication.
A number of Councillors commended the good work of staff in the City Council.
The Chief Executive informed the Council of a proposed visit by the Mayor of Chicago, Rahm
Emanuel to Galway City in early April 2018.
The meeting concluded at 8.45 p.m.
e & Signed
Mayor of GalhV
12