Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway Clty Council
held on Thursday 6th September, 2018 at 2.00 p.m.
in the Council Chamber, Galway City Council.
Cllr. N. McNelis, Mayor of the City of Galway.
C. Connolly, P. Conneely, O. Crowe, C. 6 Conehüir
F. Fahy, M. Farrell, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, P. Flannery, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
T. Connell, of Services (deputising for Chief Executive)
Ms. C. Phelan, MDirector of Sewices
Ms. L Mltdiell, Meetings Administrator
Mr. P. Foley, Administrative Officer
Ms. D. Heneghan, Clerical Offcer.
The Mayor informed the meeting that there would be a change in the order of speakers as
previously notified, as some of the Candidates were delayed in travelling to Galway.
1. Maria Goretti Moylan
The first candidate Maria Goretti Moylan gave a presentation to Councillors on her background and
why she was putting herself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway
City Council. Councillors D. Lyons, P. Conneely & T O Flaherty raised queries and discussed issues
with the candidate in relation to campaign funding & support team for Ms Moylan, balancing a
personal and Presidential role and dealing with Policy issues.
2. Sean Gallagher
The second candidate Sean Gallagher gave a presentation to Councillors on his background and
why he was putting himself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway
City Council. Councillors O. Crowe, P. Conneely, D. Lyons, T O Flaherty, C. Connolly, N. Larkin, M.
Farrell, C. Ö Conchüir, F. Fahy & D. Mc Donnell raised queries and discussed issues in relation to a
resolution of the Government situation in Northern Ireland, the difference Mr Gallagher would
bring to the role of President, upper age limit of President, the term Of President, representation of
the people of Northern Ireland & Irish Diaspora, constraints of the role, ability to speak Irish, the
use of Aras for Homeless, Disability Rights, Vision, Presidential Salary, Exemption from FOI's and the
amount of compensation Mr Gallagher had received from RTE.
3. Patrick Feeney
The third candidate Patrick Feeney gave a presentation to Councillors on his background and why
he was putting himself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway City
Council. Councillors P. Conneely, T O Flaherty, D. McDonnell, F. Fahy & C. Conchüir raised queries
1
and discussed issues in relation to Mr Feenevs campaign funding, LUAS and what Mr Feeney would
bring to the role of the President.
4. Peter Casey
The fourth candidate Peter Casey gave a presentation to Councillors on his background and why he
was putting himself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway City
Council. Councillors O. Crowe, D. Lyons, T O Flaherty, N. Larkin, F. Fahy, D. Mc Donnell, C. Ö Conchüir &
the Mayor raised queries and discussed issues in relation to knowledge of the role, Brexit, possible
pact by the three Dragons Den candidates, constraints of the role & term of the office. Mr Casey
also apologised to any Cllrs who found his statement of the "meet & greet" role of the President
offensive,
At 4.25pm Cllr D. Lyons chaired the meeting for 10 Minutes.
5. James Smyth
The fifth candidate James Smyth gave a presentation to Councillors on his background and why he
was putting himself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway City
Council. Councillors O. Crowe, T O Flaherty & P. Conneely raised queries and discussed issues in
relation to where the candidate was from and if he was in the IRA. (A reference Mr Smyth had
made during his presentation to having had guns pointed in his face).
Cllr. D. Lyons asked Mr Smyth to withdraw a remark he made about Cllr. Conneely and Mr Smyth
agreed to do so.
The Mayor requested a short break at 4.35pm and the meeting resumed at 4.50pm.
6. Gemma O' Doherty
The sixth candidate Gemma O' Doherty gave a presentation to Councillors on her background and
why she was putting herself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway
City Council. Councillors O. Crowe, F. Fahy, P. Conneely, D. Lyons, T O Flaherty, N. Larkin, F. Fahy, D.
Mc Donnell & T. O' Flaherty raised queries and discussed issues in relation to the restrictions of the
role of President, why Ms O Doherty had left Independent Newspapers, her investigative work on
the Fr. Molloy, Maurice McCabe & Veronica Guerin cases, forced Emigration & the shortage of
workers, Homelessness & Salary of the President.
7. Sarah Louise Mulligan
The seventh candidate Sarah Louise Mulligan gave a presentation to Councillors on her background
and why she was putting herself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of
Galway City Council. Councillors O. Crowe, T. O' Flaherty & the Mayor raised queries and discussed
issues in relation to how many Councils Ms Mulligan had already presented to and the recent Eight
Amendment Bill.
2
8. Jobn Groarke
The eight candidate John Groarke gave a presentation to Councillors on his background and why he
was putting himself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the nomination of Galway City
Council. Councillors O. Crowe, D. Lyons, T O Flaherty, F. Fahy & P. Conneely raised queries and
discussed issues in relation to the process of democracy, the role of President and the difficulty in
candidates having to get the nominations from 4 local authorities.
Cllr D. Lyons assumed the role of chair at 6.14pm.
9. Joan Freeman
The ninth candidate Joan Freeman apologised for being late and gave a presentation to Councillors
on her background and why she was putting herself forward as a Presidential candidate seeking the
nomination of Galway City Council. Councillors O. Crowe, D. Lyons, T O Flaherty, N. Larkin, F. Fahy, D.
Mc Donnell, M. Lohan, M. Farrell, C. 6 Conchülr & the Mayor raised queries and discussed issues in
relation to Mental Health in Ireland, her role in the Seanad, taking part in live debates, Brexit,
Emigration issues & voting rights of people living in the six counties in Northern Ireland in the
Presidential elections of Ireland.
The Mayor expressed his thanks to all the candidates, wished them well and safe travelling over the
coming weeks.
Mi
r & Signed
Mayor' of Galway
3
