Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council
held on Monday 12th February, 2018 at 4.00 p.m.
at Galway Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Galway.
Presiding:
Present
Councillors:
In Attendance:
Cllr. P. Flannery, Mayor of the City of Galway.
B. Cameron, C. 6' Conchüir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe,
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Keane, N. Larkin, M. Lohan, D. Lyons,
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O' Flaherty and J. Walsh.
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive,
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services,
Ms. E. McCormack, Director of Services,
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services,
Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director of Services,
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services,
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer,
Ms. L. Mitchell, Meetings Administrator,
Mr. M. O' Donnell, Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. E. Verling, Museum Director,
Ms. A. Rohan, Administrative Officer,
Ms. G. Reilly, Clerical Officer.
The Meeting commenced with a statement of intention to conduct the business of the
Meeting in line with Standing Orders followed by a moment of silent reflection.
Mayor Flannery advised that as part of the Saint Patrick's Day celebrations he has been invited
to travel to Galway City Council's sister cities of Seattle and Menlo Park in the United States
of America. He requested that the next Ordinary meeting of Galway City Council be put
forward to Monday 5th March 2018 at 4p.m. The request to change the meeting to facilitate
the Mayors travel to Seattle and Menlo Park was proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by
Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and agreed by Councillors.
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES
1.
(a) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 11th December
2017.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Matters of Accuracy/Matters Arising:
A synopsis of matters arising, requests and clarifications raised by Councillors were as
follows:
reference to communication and the delivery of running track under Sports Capital
Grants in collaboration with GMIT;
1
request for a CCTV Report with a policy and guidelines; reference to illegal dumping and
the use of CCTV;
request for timelines for building of three hurling Walls in the City;
a pathway to be built from Lough Rusheen to Tobar Éinne;
report/progress on halting sites;
update regarding requested extension of Coca Cola Zero bike scheme to Salthill;
update on Coastal Protection from Silver Strand to Sailin;
request for litter bin in the Claddagh to be replaced;
derelict sites report update to include a list of all derelict sites, reference to Corrib Great
Southern site; request for details of monies collected regarding derelict sites levy in
2017;
query on accuracy of minutes regarding unspent conference monies and the procedure
that should be applied;
request for progress on acquisition of vacant homes to be included in Quarterly Report;
request for a report in relation to private parking meters at Munster Avenue;
update regarding provision of €30,000 in the adopted budget, of which part is approved
for part-time staff for Westside facility;
update on retrofitting of windows and doors of housing stock;
query whether a request has issued to the National Transport Authority for general bus
stop upgrades/shelters including near Community Centre on the Seamus Quirke Road;
update on bus shelters at Merlin Park; reference to two shelters beside Menlo Park
hotel with only one allegedly being used;
update on Blackbox site; query if there is a timeline on €3 million potential funding;
request for completion date of works at Parkmore, and, if fully funded;
request for burial grounds update; reference to no available plots in Bohermore
Cemetery;
update requested on Ballindooley Cross junction, query whether any land swap is
proposed;
reference to the inequity of Budget 2018 to all citizens of Galway City;
clarification if Galway City Council propose to extend a sponsorship scheme to
playgrounds;
request for details on bus prioritisation route on the Dublin Road near Merlin Park and
reference to €50,000 in the budget for specific works;
clarity regarding bus lane/route on Dublin Road and request confirmation that there
will be no bus lane at Merlin woods;
status of City library, Merchant's Road/proposals for new City library;
query whether any plans to investigate use of hydro generation of clean energy for the
City;
request for date of submission of Galway City Ring Road Scheme to An Bord Pleanåla;
allocation of monies for flood defences and canal works was welcomed; request for
timeline for money to be drawn down;
Knocknacarra Community Centre update regarding seven day opening;
request for date contract will be signed for Cappagh Park Sports Capital Grant works,
date of commencement of works and completion date;
timeline for upgrade of Cappagh Park goal mouths.
2
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services, Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer, Mr. G. McMahon, A/Director
of Services and the Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave comprehensive replies to matters
arising, requests and clarifications sought. The Chief Executive confirmed that a report on the
Dyke Road will be presented to Members at the March Ordinary Council meeting and a CCTV
Report at the April Ordinary Council meeting.
Mayor Flannery read two Notice of Motions submitted by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty & Cllr. C. Connolly
and a vote was taken on both motions:
Proposed: Cllr. T O' Flaherty Seconded: Cllr. B. Cameron
' 'That this Council send a letter of thanks to Minister Kevin Moran for his swift action in
providing the €9.5 million euro towards flood defences and canal works in Galway City".
In Favour: 14 Against: 3 Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. C. 6' Conchüir
"That Galway City Council include a cost analysis of illegal dumping in the Departmental
Quarterly Reports provided to Councillors".
In Favour: 16 Against: O Abstain: 1 Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
A number of items raised were re-iterated under Matters of Clarification by Councillors. Cllr.
O. Crowe requested the Chief Executive to raise the issue of Galway City's designation as a
tier-three port of regional significance at an upcoming Transport committee meeting.
A discussion was held amongst Councillors and there was general consensus that issues raised
under the Minutes were taking too long to consider.
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir proposed "that this Council investigates other methodologies to expedite
the work of the Chamber more efficiently as regards the minutes. This was seconded by Cllr.
M. Lohan. No vote was taken but there was general agreement that this matter be
investigated.
Cllr. C. Connolly proposed "that individual Councillors can submit their questions to the
relevant Executive regarding Council Meeting Minutes and that the Executive will commit to
providing a written report to issue to Councillors prior to the next Council Meeting". Cllr. N.
McNelis seconded this. No vote was taken on the matter.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath advised that this matter needed to be considered in the
context of Standing Orders. It was agreed that the matter be left on the Agenda and the Chief
Executive will convene a meeting of the Procedures Committee and revert with a proposal.
3
Seconded: Cllr. T. O' Flaherty
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell
UThat the matter of the Order of Business including the confirmation of minutes be referred
to the Procedures Committee".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. B Cameron Seconded: Cllr. N McNelis
"That Galway City Council formulate a policy with regard to the provision of CCTV within
the City. The policy should lay out a road map of how applicants can apply, who the
application is sent to and who has the ultimate decision in granting the application, along
with all other criteria relating to provision of CCTV. The policy when formulated to come
before the relevant Strategic Policy Committee for ratification".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
The Minutes were adopted.
(b) Minutes of Ordinary Meeting of Galway City Council held on Monday 8th January 2018.
Seconded: Cllr. F. Fahy
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
Matters of Accuracy/Matters Arising:
As a matter of accuracy, Cllr. D. McDonnell referred to a Motion that was passed "That
Galway City Council bring forward a variation to City Development Plan to remove bus lane
from same (City Development Plan) at Merlin Lane". He confirmed that it was agreed to
defer this Notice of Motion for consideration at the next Council meeting and not at a future
meeting. A number of Councillors requested clarity on this matter.
A synopsis of matters arising, requests and clarifications raised by Councillors were as
follows:
request for a date for a workshop for Councillors on Galway Transport Strategy - City
Centre Transport Management Plan; query regarding public consultation process; A
number of Councillors raised specific items proposed in the Draft plan;
reference to the fact that discussions regarding Storm Eleanor after the January
Ordinary Council meeting ended were not minuted;
maintenance and cleaning of street gullies with issues in a number of areas of the City
raised; reference to Irish Water and drainage responsibilities;
discussion re arding correspondence from Chief Executive in relation to behaviour;
4
request to prioritise Notices of Motion that emanate from SPC meetings. The Chief
Executive suggested that the Notice of Motion agreed at the Transport SPC was
premature as detailed design and analysis had yet to be completed on the
transportation routes. It was agreed that clarification would be provided to all SPCs on
their policy advisory role as a subcommittee of the local authority.
The Chief Executive, Mr. McGrath gave comprehensive replies to matters arising, requests
and clarifications sought. Mr. McGrath referred to Code of Ethics and reiterated that staff and
Elected Members were entitled to respect in the workplace.
Mr. U. Finn, Senior Engineer gave a detailed reply with regards to the process of gully cleaning
advising that a crew is dedicated to this task.
Ms. C. Phelan, A/Director of Services referred to the specific objective in the Development
Plan that give priority to the Dublin Road route. She confirmed that there is an objective in
the Plan that states Merlin Lane is specifically for pedestrian and cycle use only. Mr. U. Finn,
Senior Engineer advised that any future proposals would come before Council for their
approval under Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended. Mr. B.
McGrath confirmed categorically that there was no proposal for a bus lane to go through
Merlin Lane or Merlin Woods. He advised that he would present a signed Report to Members
on the matter for their consideration.
Proposed: Cllr. O Crowe Seconded: Cllr. B Cameron
"That Galway City Council Executive examine the possibility of suppling the sufficient
resources to a dedicated gully cleaning team whose role would be solely directed to
maintaining the 17,000 or so gullies throughout Galway City".
In Favour: 17 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 17
The Motion was passed.
The Minutes were adopted.
2. BUSINESS PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
(a)
Local Government Auditors Report 2016 and Audit Committee Report
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance presented the Report and letter previously circulated in
relation to the Local Government Auditor's Report 2016 and Audit Committee Report.
In discussion which followed, a number of Councillors congratulated the Finance team on the
positive audit and Members raised a range of issues that were included in the Report including
land loans under the Land Aggregation Scheme; update on Capital of Culture bid costs,
subvention budget to Leisureland; recommendation of increased internal resources for the
internal audit function; alleged breach of procedure; rents review, maintenance of footpaths,
procurement of legal services and local knowledge, increase in rates collections, an
5
acknowledgement to the ratepayers of the City and the delay in revaluation of Galway City
properties; housing loans; unsold affordable housing balances; Solas/Galway Picture Palace;
procurement and the status of the Property Interest Register.
Mayor Flannery proposed an extension of time at 7.30 pm to 8.45 p.m. This was seconded
by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty and agreed.
In Favour: 13 Against: 4 Abstain: 1 Present: 18
Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance and the Chief Executive provided clarification in relation
to several points. Ms. McCormack advised that the legal services will be procured for Galway
City Council from a framework panel in 2018.
On the proposal of Cllr. D. McDonnell, seconded by Cllr. T. O' Flaherty, the report was noted.
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons
To defer Items 2(b) Annual Service Delivery Plan 2018,
4(a) Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for South Park &
4(b) Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for Kingston.
In Favour: 13 Against: 3 Abstain: 2 Present: 18
The Motion was passed.
(b)
(c)
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2018
Deferred.
Audit Committee:
(i) Consideration of Audit Committee Report for 2017;
(ii) Review of Audit Committee Charter;
(iii) Adoption of Audit Committee Work Programme for 2018.
The Mayor referred Members to the reports and documents issued. The Audit Committee
documents were proposed by Cllr. D. Lyons and seconded by Cllr. M. Farrell and agreed as
follows:
Cllr. M. Farrell
Seconded:
Cllr. D. Lyons
Proposed:
- Consideration of Audit Committee Annual Report for 2017;
- Review of Audit Committee Charter;
- Adoption of Audit Committee Work Programme for 2018.
The above three documents were agreed by Councillors.
6
Proposed: Cllr. C. Connolly Seconded: Cllr. M. Cubbard
"That Galway City Council calls on the Government to facilitate the repayment of the loans
on the 76 unsold affordable houses to Galway City Council directly so they can retain the
houses in their housing stock".
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
Proposed: Cllr. D. Lyons Seconded: Cllr. C. Ö' Conchüir
'tl propose that the Executive seek an urgent meeting with the relevant Minister to seek
financial support in reducing the burden on Galway City Council for the 'land loans' which
are outstanding".
In Favour: 13 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 13
The Motion was passed.
Cllr. D. Lyons proposed that Agenda Item 11. Any Other Business be taken next followed by
4(h) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway. This was seconded by Cllr. F. Fahy and agreed.
11. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
(a) Appointment of Committees and Representatives on Other Bodies
Advisory Group of Ballinfoile-Castlegar Neighbourhood Centre
1 position (Non Group — Appointment by Vote).
There was a general discussion regarding the Ballinfoile-Castlegar Neighbourhood Centre
Advisory Group and a number of queries were raised by Councillors.
Mr. G. McMahon confirmed that the Ballinfoile-Castlegar Neighbourhood Centre is owned by
Galway City Council and is being operated under a two-year licence and management
agreement by SCCUL Enterprises CLG under a community enterprise model. He referred to
the work of Croi na Tuaithe, a local advisory board made up of community bodies and clubs.
Mr. McMahon gave an overview of the role of the Advisory Group which will provide support
to SCCUL. He confirmed the makeup of the Advisory Group includes:
1 Representative from Galway City Council Executive;
1 Representative from SCCUL Enterprises CLG;
2 representatives from Croi na Tuaithe;
2 representatives from youth/elderly group.
There was general agreement amongst Councillors that two Councillors from Galway City
Council be on the Advisory board. A number of Councillors requested a gender balance. Mayor
Flannery proceeded to take nominations for representation on the Advisory Group. Four
nominations were agreed as follows:
7
Proposed: Cllr. M. Cubbard Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Re: Ballinfoile - Castlegar Community Centre
"l propose that the number of representatives from this Council on the advisory group be
increased to two numbers".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Nomination: Cllr. C. Connolly
Proposed: Cllr. P.
Keane
Nomination: Cllr. P. Conneely
Nomination: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Proposed: Cllr. N. McNelis
Nomination: Cllr. M. Farrell
Seconded: Cllr. M. Farrell
Proposed: Cllr. D. McDonnell Seconded: Cllr. J. Walsh
Proposed: Cllr. M. Lohan
Seconded: Cllr. D. McDonnell
Seconded: Cllr. C. Connolly
Councillor J. Walsh suggested that the two positions be rotated equally among the four
nominees. Mayor Flannery proposed that two Councillors sit on the Advisory Group for a
six month period as follows and proceeded to take a Vote:
Jan - Jun: Cllr. C. Connolly & Cllr. P. Conneely
Jul - Dec: Cllr. M. Cubbard & Cllr. M. Farrell
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed.
Mayor Flannery proceeded to read a Notice of Motion submitted at the meeting and took a
Vote:
Proposed: Cllr. N McNelis Seconded: Cllr. D McDonnell
t'Galway City Council endorses the excellent work that Time4Us has done for families in
Galway for the past 10 years. We are asking both the Ministers and departments of Health
and Justice to support this vital service so that it can continue into the future on a
sustainable basis".
In Favour: 15 Against: O Abstain: O Present: 15
The Motion was passed unanimously.
8
3.
4.
REPORTS OF COMMITTEE MEETINGS
None
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF OFFICIALS
(a) Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for South Park
Deferred.
(b) Presentation on Draft Recreation & Amenity Master Plan for Kingston
Deferred.
(c) Chief Executive's Report for February 2018
Not Considered.
(d) Chief Executive's Report for January 2018
Not Considered.
(e) Update on LA Environmental Performance Assessment Report 2014
Not Considered.
(f) Final IBAL Anti-Litter Survey Results for 2017
Not Considered.
(g) Creative Ireland — "Creative Galway Plan 2018-2022"
Not Considered.
- 2016
(h) Interim Report of the Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Arrangements in
Galway
Not Considered.
(i) BREXIT
(i) Impacts / Preparation / Planning for Galway City Council, of the invocation of Article
50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the UK Government
Not Considered.
(ii) Local Government, addressing challenges & harnessing opportunities emerging from
Brexit
Not Considered.
(iii) The view form Irish Local Government
Not Considered.
9
5. NOTICE OF MOTIONS
NOM 09/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly
11th April, 2016
"That GCC requests that the Government provide adequate funding to provide special
housing units for victims of domestic violence".
Not Considered.
NOM 16/16 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
24th August, 2016.
"That this Council ask Sean Kyne T.D. and the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine
to intervene in the ongoing dispute at Ros a Mhil Harbour between local fisherman and the
harbour authorities".
Not Considered.
NOM 2/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
23rd January, 2017
"Member of Galway City Council are calling on the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs,
Minister Katherine Zappone to invest in early Childhood Care and Education to ensure that
children have access to quality, sustainable and affordable childcare with decent pay and
conditions for professional in the sector.
Early Years professionals are hugely dedicated professionals who care for and educate
children during the most crucial years of their development. It is vital that children receive
high quality care and education. However a lack of investment means that qualified
professionals are struggling to make ends meet and providers are struggling to stay open. We
call on Minister Zappone to put children first and invest in quality childcare.
Not Considered.
NOM 4/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
2nd February, 2017
"That Galway City Council calls on Minister Creed to relax the criteria for young Farmer
Scheme as regards educational requirements. As it currently stands, the strict deadlines for
enrolment in FETAC level 6 courses means that many worthy applications are automatically
excluded from the scheme. With farming uptake by younger people at an al-time low, this
Council considers it of the upmost importance that proper incentives are given to young
people to get involved in farming activities and that the legislation in place is as inclusive as
possible"
Not Considered.
10
NOM 6/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Ö Conchüir
26th January, 2017
Go n-iarrfadh an Chomhairle seo ar Ollscoil na hÉireann, Gaillimh aisghairm a dhéanamh ar
an gcinneadh a ghlac si deireadh a chur leis an riachtanas go mbeadh Gaeilge ar a thoil né ar
a toil ag Uachtarån na hOllscoile agus toil na Comhairle a dhéanamh agus Gaillimh a chur chun
cinn mar chathair dhåtheangach.
Not Considered.
NOM 9/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council calls on the Government to declare a national housing emergency and
in doing so, advance emergency housing measures through state legislation and seek
flexibility from the European Commission on the application of EU fiscal rules relating to
financing of social housing"
Not Considered.
NOM 10/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Farrell
3rd April, 2017
"Galway City Council condems the cut in state subvention to Bus Éireann of 35% between
2009 and 2015 and calls on the Government to increase funding to Bus Éireann so that the
company can continue to provide essential public tra nsport services throughout rural Ireland
and between urban centres as it has done for over 60 years."
Not Considered.
Notice submitted by Cllr. P. Flannery at Council Meeting 10th April, 2017 and requested to
be left on the agenda.
"That the Draft plan for the Kingston Lands be altered to accommodate the concerns of the
Kingston Gardens Residents. Namely:
1) Have no access through Kingston Gardens
2) Rotate the main pitch 90 degrees if possible and accommodate the concerns of the
residents by having two playing cages rotated 90 degrees."
Not Considered.
NOM 11/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. C. Connolly at Transportation SPC Meeting
11th May, 2017
"That Galway Transportation SPC calls for the inclusion of a bus priority facility from
Knocknacarra to East Side / Parkmore across the Quincentenary Bridge."
This motion has been approved at Transport SPC Members and is being forwarded to the full
Council for consideration
Not Considered.
11
NOM 12/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. P. Flannery
29th May, 2017
"That Galway City Council supports the Northern and Western Regional Assembly, the
Western Development Commission and the Insight Centre for Data Analytics in establishing a
Smart Region approach to encourage new industries, sectors and opportunities"
Not Considered.
NOM 13/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. Crowe
12th July, 2017
"That Galway City Council hereby calls on the Gaelic Athletic Association to ensure any
matches broadcast on channels requiring subscription fees are also made available on free to
air television in order to allow access for everyone in the country to view such matches. This
should be done in order to reflect that the GAA is a unique part of Irish culture, which belongs
to the Irish people and has been built by their efforts along with significant State investment
from taxpayer money".
Not Considered.
NOM 21/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. D. Lyons
25th September, 2017.
"That Galway City Council calls on the National Transport Authority to issue the appropriate
bus licence as a matter of urgency, to provide a bus service to serve the following housing
estates Sli Burca, Sli Gheal, Leas na Mara, Fana Bui, Leitir Burca, Maigh Burca, Radharc na
Farraige, Drisin and Mhaoilfn located on the Upper Ballymoneen Road, Galway"
Not Considered.
NOM 22/17 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. O. crowe
3rd October, 2017.
"That Galway City Council supports the Lifesaving Equipment Bill 2017 which introduces a
new criminal offence for the interference with lifesaving equipment such as lifebuoys and
defibrillators"
Not Considered.
NOM 1/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
20th January, 2018
"The discovery of Dün na Gaillimhe 13th Century ruins on Quay Street is an exciting and
wonderful find. Its relevance for the Capital of Culture 2020 legacy is particularly significant
for our city. Its responsible preservation, in place, is welcomed by Galway City Council. Any
and all removable artefacts from this site must be preserved and displayed, in co-operation
with the relevant national authorities, at Galway City Museum, for the enjoyment of all
Galway citizens and visitors."
Response to NOM 3/18 issued on 9th February 2018.
12
NOM 2/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. M. Lohan
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council recognises that homes to rent and to purchase are becoming
increasingly unaffordable and calls on government to; Immediately introduce ambitious
affordable rental and purchase housing schemes led by Local Authorities, and where
appropriate, Approved Housing Bodies and Housing Co-operatives with clear annual targets
for all local authorities; and to Design the Home Building Finance Ireland fund to prioritise
loan finance to small and medium sized builders participating in Council led affordable
housing schemes"
Not Considered.
NOM 3/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council supports Lough Corrib Angling Federation in their attempts to
protect the unique salmonid ecosystems in the Lough Corrib Catchment Area and that these
systems are designated salmonid fisheries and need to be protected in law".
Response to NOM 3/18 issued on 9th February 2018.
NOM 4/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. F. Fahy
5th February, 2018
"That Galway City Council progress their plans for a bus lane on the R338 old Dublin Road
eastbound and that the bus lane be constructed on the hard shoulder adjacent to the R338
and that the R338 be widened to facilitate the Bus lane between the Corrib Great Southern
and the Martin Roundabout and that following a motion proposed at the Transportation SPC
on Monday 29th January 2018 by Cllr. Frank Fahy that officials would investigate the feasibility
of constructing a new entrance to Merlin Park Hospital at a point roughly midway between
the current entrance and the traffic lights at Galway Chrystal to minimise the damage to the
South Woods".
Not Considered.
NOM 5/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
6th February, 2018
"That the draft plan for South Park be altered to accommodate the concerns and needs of
West United and the general football community and that a full - size all weather pitch be
delivered rather than what is proposed".
Response to NOM 3/18 issued on 7th February 2018.
13
NOM 6/18 Notice given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
5th February, 2018
Recognising that the 2016 programme for government states that the Government will
"honour our commitment to recognise the State of Palestine as part of a lasting settlement
of the conflict". Galway City Council calls on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr.
Simon Coveney T.D. to join the 9 other E.U. countries and swiftly recognise the State of
Palestine, compromising of Gaza, West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Not Considered.
6. QUESTIONS
Q 2/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
2nd January, 2018.
Have meetings taken place between Galway City Council and Officials of UCH with regard to
the Helipad on the Shantalla Community Green Area? What were the outcomes of these
meetings and what are the long term plans of UCH?"
Not Considered.
Q 3/18
Question given by: Cllr. M. Cubbard
Date Received:
15th January, 2018.
Can the Roads Department advise what procedures are in place for gully cleaning throughout
the city? Can you provide details of how a log of this is kept?
Not Considered.
Q 4/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. N. McNelis
6th February, 2018.
Could a breakdown be given on costs related to storms Ophelia and Eleanor. This will include
staffing, materials, and the clean-up costs. Can you provide a total figure of what the total
amount that was paid out in Flood Relief to businesses and homes in Galway City.
Not Considered.
Q 5/18
Question given by:
Date Received:
Cllr. B. Cameron
6th February, 2018.
In light of the damning report from IBAL in its last quarterly report, when is it envisaged that
the issues highlighted will be addressed regarding the Children's Millennium Park Graffiti?
Not Considered.
7.
ITEMS FOR COUNCILLORS' INFORMATION
Items 7 (a) to (w) were noted.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
(h)
(k)
(m)
Letter from Leo Varadkar T.D. Taoiseach dated 5th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations
Letter on behalf of the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan dated 10th July 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding attack at London Bridge and Borough
Market and the fire at Grenfell Tower
Letter from Maurice O'Gorman, President Galway Chamber dated 10th July 2017
Re: Letter of congratulations on success of SeaFest 2017
Letter on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Tourism & Sport, Shane Ross T.D
Re: Acknowledgement of letter regarding Connemara Greenway.
Email from C. O'Connor, SEO, Corporate Services, Limerick City & county Council dated
4th August 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City and County Council 2017
Letter from Mr. Brendan Holland on behalf of Galway City Business Association and
Eyre Square All Ireland Screen Committee
Letter from M. Cleary, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Offaly County
Council dated 19th September 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Offaly County Council
Letter from T. O'Callaghan, Administrative Officer, Corporate Services, Limerick City &
County Council dated 5th October 2017 Re: Resolution passed by Limerick City &
County Council
Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 6th November 2017 Re: Rugby World Cup 2023 —
Ireland Bid — Circulated November 2017
Updated Email from O. Hodges, IRFU dated 21st November 2017 Re: Rugby World Cup
2023 - Ireland Bid
Letter from E. Brophy, Meetings, Administrator, Carlow County Council 21st November
2017
Re: Notice of Motion adopted by Members of Carlow County Council
Circular LG 07/2017 & Circular LG 8/2017
Expenses and allowances of elected members, and Local Government (Expenses
of Local Authority Members) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (S.I. no. 494/2017).
Re: Update in relation to expenses and allowances for Local Authority Members
from Mr Gary McGuinn, Assistant Principal Officer, Local Government Oversight
and Governance, Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government
Letter from R. Smyth, Embassy of the United States of America
Re: Acknowledgement of Notice of Motion — Las Vegas, Nevada condolences
Letter from K. Colreavy, Meetings Administrator, Sligo County Council
Re: Resolution passed by Sligo County Council
15
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(u)
(w)
8.
Emails from Chris Smith, Private Secretary to Minister Shane Ross dated 18th & 19th
December 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of Notice of Motion Galway City Ring Road
Letter from Cathal Ö Miochåin, Minister's Office, Department of Housing, Planning
and Local Government dated 18th December 2017
Re: Acknowledgement of Resolution by Galway City Council requesting legislation for
the disposal of paint
Letter from Cormac Guckian, Chairperson, Galway City Business Association Re:
Support given to the Galway City Centre Business Groups
Circular LG09/2017 — Adjustments to elected members' representational payment in
connection with the Public Service Pay and Pensions Act 2017
Circular F.14/17 — Electoral Amendment (Dåil Constituencies) Act 2017, Revision of
Dåil Constituencies dated 27th December 2017
Northern & Western Regional Assembly - Annual Report and Financial Statement 2016
Letter from Most Rev. Brendan Kelly, Diocesan Administrator, dated 17th January 2018
Re: Acknowledgement of letter of congratulations
Letter from H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator, Waterford City & County Council,
dated 15th January 2018 Re: Notice of Motion adopted by Members of Waterford City
& County Council
E-mail from Anne O'Kelly, LGMA dated 16th January 2018 Re: ICTU — Irish Water
Transformation
Letter from Brid Ni Chonghöile, Gaillimh le Gaeilge dated 15th January 2018
acknowledging letter of sympathy
CONFERENCES
It was proposed by Cllr. M. Farrell and seconded by Cllr. P. Keane and agreed by Councillors
for approval of attendance at the following Conferences/Approved Training Events/Training
Educational Programme:
Seconded: Cllr. P. Keane
Proposed: Cllr. M. Farrell
1)
2)
Title: Celtic Conferences — Nursing Homes Support Scheme
Date: 16th, 17th & 18th February 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Niall McNelis.
Title: 29th Colmcille Winter School — Housing Provision in Ireland
Date: 23rd & 24th February 2018
Venue: Colmcille Heritage Centre, Gartan, Church Hill, Letterkenny, Co. Donegal
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
No nominations.
16
3)
4)
5)
6)
Title: Planning Conference 2018
implementation
Date: 28th February 2018
— National Planning
Framework:
towards
Venue: Radisson Blu Royal Hotel, Golden Lane, Dublin
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell & Cllr. Niall McNelis.
Title: European Energy Poverty Conference 2018 — 'A United Approach'
Date: 29th March 2018
Venue: Croke Park Conference Centre, Dublin
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell.
Title: Celtic Conferences — New Affordable Houses Schemes
Date: 2nd, 3rd & 4th March 2018
Venue: The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Niall McNelis, Cllr. Noel Larkin &
Cllr. Mike Cubbard.
Title: Celtic Conferences — The Eight Amendment —A Constitutional Minefield
Date: 23rd, 24th & 25th March 2018
Venue: The Clonakilty Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Billy Cameron & Cllr. Mark Lohan.
Approved Training
1)
Title: Association of Irish Local Government Module 1
Date: 13th February 2018
Venue: Lakeside Manor Hotel, Virginia
The following Councillors were approved to attend:
Cllr. Declan McDonnell, Cllr. Terry O'Flaherty, Cllr. Frank Fahy, Cllr. P Conneely, Cllr.
John Walsh, Cllr. Ollie Crowe & Cllr. Niall McNelis.
Training Educational Programme
1)
Title: BA in Business, Enterprise & Community Development - Equal Ireland
Year: 2017
Venue: Athlone Institute of Technology
Participant: Cllr. N. McNelis
17
9. VOTES OF SYMPATHY / CONGRATULATIONS
Votes of Sympathy:
John Joe McDonagh, RIP
Maemie Golding, RIP
Kathleen McDonnell, RIP
Stephanie O' Reilly, RIP
Mrs. Breda Ryan, RIP
Eileen Browne, RIP
Patrick Keating, RIP
Nicholas Barrett, RIP
Ann Caulfield, RIP
John O'Keeffe, RIP
Mrs. Della Hanley, RIP
Marie Krahenbuhl, RIP
Mrs. Rose Carroll, RIP
Mrs. Ann Cahill, RIP
Mrs. Marie Faherty, RIP
Mr. Joe Walsh, RIP
Mr. Michael Cahill, RIP
Mr. Lorcan Deasy, RIP
Mr. John Morgan, RIP
Mrs. Josephine Tully, RIP
Mrs. Eleanor O'Carroll, RIP
Mrs. Mary O'Sullivan, RIP
Sean McQuillan, RIP
Mary Cunningham, RIP
The Mayor and Chief Executive wished their expression of sympathies be attached to those
recently bereaved including the members of staff of Galway City Council who were recently
bereaved.
Votes of Congratulations:
Bishop Kelly on his appointment as Bishop of Galway, Kilmacduagh and Kilfenora;
Jim Cotter, N.U.I.G. on his recent retirement from the National University of Ireland, Galway;
Gary Thornton on coming ISt place in 2018 World Marathon Challenge.
Acknowledgements were made regarding the good work by staff that recently left Galway
City Council including Ms. Eileen Ruane, former A/Director of Services, Mr. Daithf Flood,
former A/Senior Executive Engineer and Mr. Alan Nevin, former Executive Technician.
Mr. Gary McMahon and Ms. Caroline Phelan were welcomed into the roles of A/Director of
Services.
A number of Councillors acknowledged the great contributions of Mrs. Breda Ryan, RIP, wife
of former Mayor of the City of Galway to the spirit of the City of Galway.
Councillors thanked GMIT for hosing the meeting and for their hospitality.
18
10.
OTHER BUSINESS SET FORTH IN THE NOTICE CONVENING THE
MEETING
The meeting concluded at 8.45 p.m.
19
Co«FV & Signa
Mayor ojGalway