1 
 
 
Minutes of Special Meeting of Galway City Council 
Held on Monday 20th February 2017, 
at 3.00 p.m., in City Hall, College Road, Galway. 
 
 
Presiding: 
 
Cllr.N. Larkin, Mayor of the City of Galway  
 
Present: 
Councillors: C. Ó Conchúir, P. Conneely, C. Connolly, M.J. Crowe, O. Crowe, 
M. Cubbard, F. Fahy, M. Farrell, P. Flannery, P. Keane, M. Lohan,  D. Lyons, 
D. McDonnell, N. McNelis, T. O'Flaherty and J. Walsh.  
 
In Attendance:           
Mr. B. McGrath, Chief Executive 
 
 
 
Mr. T. Connell, Director of Services 
                             Ms. E. McCormack, Head of Finance / Director of Services 
 
 
 
Ms. P. Philbin, A/Director of Services 
 
 
Mr. G. McMahon, Meetings Administrator 
                             Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer 
 
 
Ms. S. Donoghue, A/Senior Social Worker 
 
 
Mr. Liam Blake, Senior Executive Planner 
 
 
Mr. J. Nyirenda, Traveller Accommodation Programme Manager 
 
 
Ms. S. Loughnane, Executive Engineer 
 
 
Ms. K. Lohan, Clerical Officer 
 
 
Ms J. Georges, Clerical Officer 
 
 
 
Mayor Larkin proposed that Item 3 on the agenda be taken first. This was agreed. 
 
3. Business Prescribed by Statute 
 
(a) Proposal for a Material Contravention of Galway City Development Plan 2017- 23 under Section 
34 (6) of the Planning & Development Act (2000) to facilitate the provision of a single storey 
extension to No. 302 Corrib Park (Pl. Ref/16/310) 
 
Mr. L. Blake referred to a report previously circulated outlining the issues regarding the proposed 
Material Contravention and the related planning application. He indicated that following advertising 
the proposal publicly, no submissions had been received. He also indicated the positive 
recommendation of the Chief Executive in the matter. 
 
Cllr. O. Crowe proposed, seconded by Cllr. McDonnell, the adoption of the proposal.  This was 
unanimously agreed by all 16 members present.  
 
1. Traveller Accommodation Programme 
 
(a) To receive an overview on Traveller Accommodation across Galway City 
(b) To hear a presentation by Galway Traveller Movement 
(c ) Adopt mid-term review on Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 – 2018 pursuant to the 
Traveller Accommodation Act 1998 
 
 Mr. D. Mahon, Senior Executive Officer, outlined in a presentation to the Mayor and Members 
(previously circulated) the range of historical and current issues in relation to Traveller 

2 
 
accommodation and TAP.  He indicated costs of traveller accommodation and details of issues 
around estate management. He indicated the scope and size of existing traveller-specific 
accommodation and the five possible proposed sites to cater for emergency accommodation. He 
outlined the process of the mid-term review of TAP 2014 -2018 including the series of meetings 
undertaken throughout the month of February. In conclusion he emphasised the requirement to 
complete the mid-term review and indicated the current objectives around the Urban Horse Project 
and the complementary allocations of housing to Traveller families through other means including 
HAP, RAS and long-term-leasing. 
 
Ms. B. Kelly and Ms M. Ó Riada on behalf of Galway Traveller Movement then made a presentation 
to the Mayor and Members, ‘Understanding Traveller Accommodation Needs in Galway City – 
Promoting Cultural Diversity: An Equality Perspective.’ In their presentation they gave an 
introduction to GTM and its main areas of work. They supported this background with a range of 
statistics relating to Travellers in Galway city including demography and health information.  They 
went on to outline various activities in the areas of education, enterprise and work. They outlined 
the difficulties experienced by some Traveller families in securing accommodation in the city 
including the situation at Carrowbrowne Temporary and Transient sites, the over-crowded situation 
at Cúl Trá and the issue of homelessness.  Four imperatives for action on Traveller accommodation 
including legal, democratic, administrative and value-led were outlined. The need for sustainable 
solutions to Traveller accommodation were outlined including the opportunities to link with the 
Local Economic & Community Plan of the LCDC and to link with a range of agencies in a collaborative 
cross-sectoral relationship. 
 
Mr. Jack Keyes addressed the Mayor and Members on behalf of CENA which is an Approved Housing 
Body which focuses on culturally-appropriate accommodation especially for Traveller families. He 
outlined a range of projects which associates of the CENA AHB had previously been involved in and 
lessons learned including ensuring a high level of Traveller involvement, working with established 
family groupings and the value of a partnership approach between Traveller support organisations 
and Local Authorities. He advised that Galway City Council had successfully bid to pilot one housing 
project with CENA which has funding stream of its own to the value of €1 million. 
 
Mayor Larkin thanked the presenters for their contribution. On the proposal of Cllr. McDonnell, 
seconded by Cllr. Fahy and agreed by all present, Standing Orders were suspended to allow each 
Member 5 minutes speaking time.  The Mayor invited comments and questions from Members. 
 
Issues raised  in a very lengthy discussion inter alia included: the number of existing sites in the East 
Ward in comparison to the Central and West Wards; the costs incurred in dealing with illegal 
encampments; the history of Traveller housing in the city; issues around the control of horses and 
the status of the Urban Horse Project; whether the provision of hard-stand halting site is a failed 
concept; the preference of some Members for full ‘social integration’ of Traveller families in 
‘standard’ housing; issues around the purchase and cost of lands at Keeraun; safety concerns around 
over-crowding in Cúl Trá; the zoning of land at the suggested potential site in Westside; issues of 
‘behaviour’ and respect’ and CENA’s mission statement;  the vindication of Travellers’ rights; anti-
social behaviour; the potential of the former airport site for use as an emergency transient site; the 
TAP in the context of the wider housing crisis; the powers available to the Chief Executive; the 
funding available to the CENA project and the status and urgency of adopting the mid-term review of 
the TAP. 
 
Responses and clarifications were provided by the Chief Executive, the acting Director of Services, 
the Senior Executive Officer in Housing and by Mr. Keyes and Ms Ó Riada. 
 

3 
 
In the course of debate, two motions had been proposed: 
 
Proposed by:  Cllr. M. Cubbard  
Seconded by: Cllr O. Crowe 
 
“As the site in Westside is land locked, not levelled, adjacent to homes, businesses, sports facilities 
and a public walkway, I propose it be removed as consideration for a halting site as part of the 
Traveller Accommodation  Plan 2014 – 2018.” 
 
Proposed by:  Cllr. P. Keane 
Seconded by: Cllr.  O. Crowe 
 
“In circumstances where the Galway City Council Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 – 2018 
is almost three years adopted by this Council and given that the information contained in the Report 
does not reflect the current reality with regard to the needs for Traveller Accommodation within 
Galway City and taking into account the contributions made by Councillors at the Review Meeting 
held this afternoon in City Hall IT IS HERBY RESOLVED that this Council conducts a full review of the 
Accommodation Programme in accordance with the provisions of Section 17 of the Housing 
(Traveller Accommodation) Act, 1998, such review to focus particularly on Accommodation Type and 
the provision of Social Housing and Group Housing in priority and / or as an alternative to Permanent 
Halting Sites in the delivery of the Programme by Galway City Council.” 
 
Following discussion, Cllr. Keane agreed to the deferral of his motion to the next meeting of the 
Council on 6th March subject to the text being referred for legal opinion.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. O. Crowe, seconded by Cllr. Ó Conchúr, it was agreed to leave Cllr. Cubbard’s 
motion on the agenda for the next meeting pending clarification around Cllr. Keane’s motion. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. McDonnell, seconded by Cllr. McNelis, the suspension of Standing Orders 
was rescinded with all 13 Members present at the time in favour. 
 
Having reached 7.30pm, on the proposal of Cllr. Lyons, seconded by Cllr. Cubbard, it was proposed to 
extend the meeting to deal with Item 2. until 8.00pm and to return to the discussion of the Traveller 
Accommodation Programme Mid-term Review and the Standing Orders Review at the next Ordinary  
Meeting to commence at 2.00pm on 6th March. 
 
In favour:  
8  
Against: 
4 
Absent:  
6 
 
2. Review of Standing Orders 
 
(a) To consider the report from Procedures Committee on the Draft Standing Orders Review. 
 
Mr. D. Mahon, SEO, introduced the report on the review of Standing Orders from the Procedures 
Committee. 
 
Members discussed, proposed, seconded and agreed the adoption of Standing Orders 1, 3, 4 and 5. 
It was agreed to defer decision on Standing Order No 2 until 6th March pending the availability of an 
English translation of the prayer. 
 
The Meeting ended at 8.00 pm. 
