COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
CeantacBarda$@GtvChonamara
MunicipalDistriGt of C qnamara
Minutes of the Conamara Municipal District Roads Programme
Meeting held on Friday 31st March 2026 at 12.00pm in the Council
Chamber
I LATHAIR:
CATHAOIRLEACH:
BAILL:
OIFIGH:
Cllr. G King
Comh T. Ö Curraoin, Cllr. E. Mannion, Cllr M. Leainde, Comh
P. Mac An Iomaire, Cllr M Lee, Cllr N. Thomas, Cllr S. Walsh,
Cllr T. Welby.
U. Finn, D.O.S., C. Harley S.E. T. Prendergast S.E., l. Martyn
A.O. Meetings Administrator,G. Byrne A.O. N. O'Conaota E.E,
A. O'Halloran E.E, S. Dillion C.O.
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the meeting.
1. To consider and adopt the 2026 Annual Schedule of proposed Works of
Maintenance and repair to be carried out in the Conamara Municipal
District (to include the Roads Programme 2026).
Mr. Finn informed the members that the roads budget for this year is 79m an
annual increase of 15%. The increase in LPT and Commercial Rates helped with
the increase in the Budget.
Mr. Harley gave a presentation to the members on the Schedule of Works 2026 for
the Conamara Municipal District and the Roads Programme 2026 and he provided
a map which gave an overview of the proposed works.
He gave a breakdown of the Roads Programme as follows:
IIP
Dept of Transport
Til
NTA
G.C.C.
€46m
€17.2m
€2.6m
€500,000 (Bus stop enhancements)
€12m
He said that 120kms of roads would be upgraded in this programme and he
thanked Mr. O'Conaola and his team for their work.
Mr. O'Conaola advised that the Restoration Improvement Programme for
Conamara M.D. was over€5m this year an 6% increase on 2025. He said that this
is the strengthening programme and is hugely important in maintaining the road.
It includes surface restoration, pavement overlay works and drainage where
required.
o
The Restoration Maintenance Programme is valued at €5.5m and the Restoration
Maintenance Programme (surface dressing is valued at €1.15m and this is for
improvements to the skid resistance and to prevent the ingress of water into the
road structure.and in maintaining adequate skid resistance.
Discretionary & Grant programmes for Local Tertiary roads are separate from the
main programmes.
Climate Change Programme funding is for roads damaged by storms
Safety Improvement Works Programme Three Projects approved.
Coill Rua Thoir €25k
O
Baile an tSruthéin (Streamstown) €60k
Cuan Na Loinge €60k
Renewal of road markings at junctions €10k
Overlays on Contract and works to commence mid-April.
The members thanked the staff for the preparation of the Roads Programme.
Cathaoirleach King queried the Climate Change funding for Clifden.
21
Mr. O'Halloran replied that the funding is for works on Ballyconneely to Clifden
road and for drainage.
Cathaoirleach King stated that the funding is not adequate for works on the Carna
road.
Cllr. Lee raised concerns that the surface dressing was not effective and there are
a lot of bumps and potholes on the road to Bealadangan.
Cllr. Mannion thanked everyone and enquired regarding the Ring Road and funding
for N59 Maam Cross to Clifden and expressed disappointment regarding the N59
Bunnakill to Claremont. She enquired regarding funding for maintenance of
Greenways and she requested more signage for the one- way system in Clifden
town.
Comh Mac An Iomaire expressed concern regarding the condition of the road to
Bealadangan. He said that the surface dressing is a waste of money and it often
lasts less than a year.
Cllr. Welby highlighted his satisfaction with Electric Skyline and their prompt
action.
He requested an update on the L.I.S. schemes. He recommended that the roads
leading to the graveyards in Ballyconneely and Leenane should be funded through
L.I.S.
He expressed satisfaction that funding was received for Burann Road as he had
been calling for repairs to be carried out.
He requested an update on the N59 Kylemore Bridge. Bus Stops on N59 and
Pedestrian Crossing in Oughterard.
Mr. Harley responded that he expects additional funding to be allocated late
summer, with Mr. Finn confirming that L.I.S. schemes are applicable for roads
down to Graveyards as they are public amenities.
He said that applications were invited in 2024 with two hundered on the waiting
list which will be finalised by the end of 2026. He advised that a new scheme will
be advertised in 2027.
He said that an update regarding the N59 Projects would be provided at the next
meeting.
310
Mr. Finn advised that he would enquire regarding funding for maintenance of the
Greenways and he said there is a provision in the budget for emergency funding.
He said that an update regarding the N59 Projects would be provided at the next
meeting.
Comh O'Curraoin expressed concern with the road at Cut Na Loinge and stated it
is impassable during high tides.
Cathaoirleach King thanked the staff and he welcomed the increase in funding to
€79m for roads in the County.
On the proposal of Cllr. Mannion and Seconded by Cllr. Lee the Roads Programme
was adopted.
Cllr. Welby raised his concerns in relation to the road at Killanin and requested
that emergency works be carried out.
Mr. Finn responded that he would provide an update for the next meeting.
Cathaoirleach King concluded the meeting.
Criochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Signed:
Date:
41 p
O
o