Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at ÅRAS AN CHONTAE PROSPECT HILL
CATHAOIRLEACH:
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Monday. 22nd June 2026
Cllr. Andrew Reddington
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, l. Canning, J. Charity, D.
Connolly, M. Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. Ö Curraoin, G.
Donohue, P. Feeney, T. Grealish, A. Harney, L.
Harney, M. Hoade, C. Keane, D. Kelly, , Killilea, M.
Kinane, M. Lee, P. Mac An Iomaire, M. Maher, J.
McClearn, , S. McHugh Ryan, M. McNamara, E. F.
Parsons, M. Regan, N. Thomas, O. Turner, S. Walsh
and T. Welby.
Comh. [Cllr. M. Leainde, D. Geraghty, G. Finnerty,
K. McHugh Farag, P. Keaveney, D. Killilea, D.
Collins, G. King and E. Mannion.
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L. Hanrahan,
Director of Services, Mr. Michael Owens, Director of
Services, Mr. Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services, Ms.
E. Ruane, Director of Services, Ms. K O'Connor,
Head of Finance, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. J. Brann Meetings Administrator, Ms.
L. Keady, A/Senior Executive Officer, Ms. S.
Elwood, Staff Officer, Ms. L. O'Donnell, Assistant
Staff Officer.
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
Page 1 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
ITEM NO.I CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn the minutes of
the Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 25th May were AGREED.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Canning the minutes
of the Corporate Policy Group held on 18th May 2026 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Canning the minutes of
the Climate, Heritage & Biodiversity Strategic Policy Committee held on 26th
November 2025 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kelly SECONDED by Cllr. Cunniffe the minutes of the
Housing Strategic Policy Committee held on 19th February 2026 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Comh. Lee the minutes of the
Community, Irish Language, Gaeltacht, Tourism & Integration Strategic Policy
Committee held on 20th February 2026 were NOTED.
on the PROPOSAL of Comh. Ö Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. Broderick the
minutes of the Physical Development, Transportation & Emergency Services
Strategic Policy Committee held on 26th March 2026 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Keane SECONDED by Cllr. Canning the minutes of the
Environmental Protection & Agriculture Strategic Policy Committee held on 23rd April
2026 were NOTED.
Page 2 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
It was agreed by the Members, following a recommendation from the Corporate
Policy Group (CPG) that Galway County Council would hold a Civic Reception to
honour the following:
• Aistear — First place winners of the Siansa Geal Linn music competition 2026.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kinnane SECONDED by Cllr. Feeney it was AGREED
that a Civic Reception will be held.
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER FILLING OF CASUAL VACANCY ON FORUM
CONNEMARA CLG
Report dated 20th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Comh. Mac An Iomaire it was
AGREED to appoint Cllr. Mannion to Forum Connemara CLG.
The Chief Executive stated that it is very important for Elected Members to be part of
these groups and to report on this work back into the Council.
ITEM NO.4 FILLING OF A CASUAL VACANCY ON THE MEMBERSHIP OF
GALWAY ROSCOMMON EDUCATION TRAINING BOARD (GRETB)
Report dated 16th June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty it was AGREED
to appoint Cllr. Kelly to the membership of Galway Roscommon Education Training
Board (GRETB).
Page 3 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
ITEM NO. 5 REPORTS ON ACTIVITIES AND OPERATION OF BODIES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 141 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED BY SECTION 53 OF THE 2014 ACT).
Report dated 15th June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Feeney SECONDED by Cllr. Hoade it was AGREED to
approve reports on the activities and operation of the following bodies in accordance
with section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 Act (as amended by section 53 of
the 2014 act) for the period June 2025 to May 2026 inclusive:
(a) Lough Corrib Navigation Trustees
(b) Athenry Heritage and Tourism Co. Ltd.
(c) Association of Irish Local Government
(d) Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd.
(e) Local Authority Members Association (LAMA)
(f) Western Inter-County Rail Committee
(g) Galway & Roscommon Education & Training Board Committee
(h) Regional Health Forum Representation, West
(i) Galway Rural Development Company
C) Comhar na nOileån Teoranta
(k) Üdarås na Gaeltachta
ITEM NO. 6 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF THE
LOCAL GOVERNMNET ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED)
Report dated 15th June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McHugh SECONDED by Comh. Lee it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. M Maher to attend AILG Elected Member Training Programme May
2026 — Module 3 — "Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide
and Addiction Issues" at Hotel Kilmore, Cavan on 21st May 2026. (Retrospective
Approval).
Page 4 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. I-loade SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. M Hoade to attend AILG Northern and Western Women's Caucus
at the Radisson Hotel, Galway on 17th June 2()26 (Retrospective Approval).
on the PROPOSAL of Comh. Ö Curraoin SECONDED by Comh. Lee it was
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. M. Maher, T Ö Curraoin, G. Finnerty, G. King, & M.
Hoade to attend "OPR - AILG Councillors Planning Training at the Hodson Bay
Hotel, Westmeath on 20th June 2026 (Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO. 7 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE TO AUTHORISE
THE ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE MEETINGS OTHER EVENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001 (AS AMENDED).
Report dated 15th June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
on the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Canning SECONDED by Comh. Ö Curraoin it was
AGREED to authorise Cllr. A. Harney to attend IPB Insurance's Centenary AGM at
The Mansion House, Dublin on ISt May 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO. 8 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMEND APPROPRIATE APPROVE THE
ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR STRATEGY 2026-2031
AS APPROVED BY THE HOUSING STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE AND
PREPARED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 35 OF HOUSING
(MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2009.
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of Service gave a presentation on the Draft Anti-Social
Behaviour Strategy 2026-2031. He advised that this Draft Strategy has also been
brought to the Housing SPC and CPG members for their consideration.
Page 5 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Canning it was AGREED
to approve the adoption of the Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Strategy 2026-2031 , as
approved by the Housing Strategic Policy Committee and prepared in accordance with
section 35 of housing (miscellaneous provisions) act 2009.
Cllrs. D. Connolly, Donohue, Harney, Geraghty, M. Connolly, Parsons &
Mannion raised the following points and queries:
It is very important that we have this document and that it can reviewed and
that it is fit for purpose.
Queried the part which relates to the confidentiality of the complainant.
Concerns raised that going forward people will be afraid to make a complaint.
If a Tenant is brave enough to provide the Council with information, their
name needs to be protected.
Zero tolerance can be dependent on resources, and we need to ensure we
have the necessary resources.
In previous strategy located on our website, it states that "The Anti-Social
Behaviour Policy is underpinned by the Tenancy Agreement signed by the
Tenant and Galway County Council in accordance with the Housing Acts
1966 to 2014". Queried does this still form part of tenancy agreements?
Queried does the local authority have specific powers to evict tenants in
relation to issues with drugs, to include violent threats as wasn't obvious in the
document.
Action needs to be taken where tenants are in breach of their tenancy
agreement.
Clarification sought on who insures the property, is it the tenant or the local
authority?
Properties are very expensive to repair and do up.
In the event of an eviction of a tenant, is there correlation between local
authorities for those involved in anti-social behaviour.
CCTV needs to be put in place, when will this happen?
Noted there is a funding allocation of €40,000 for CCTV, can it be rolled out in
other areas.
Page 6 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. D. Mitchell & E. Ruane:
Resources and confidentiality of the complainant will be dealt with on an
individual basis. Information sharing is subject to GDPR.
Report clearly states graduated approach. Section D of the tenancy
agreement clearly outlines the procedure which forms part of this document.
The properties are ileansured by Galway County Council.
You cannot be on more than one housing list and a reference would not be
provided if a tenant is evicted.
Currently awaiting Gardai protocol in relation to CCTV.
Funding allocation of €40,000 for CCTV is already allocated to Illegal
Dumping Initiative's. There are specific projects already identified and this
funding will allow the purchase of necessary equipment.
ITEM NO. 9 TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - JUNE 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
Report dated June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
The Management Report — June 2026 in accordance with Section 136(2) of the
Local Government Act 2021 (as amended) was NOTED.
There were no matters arising.
ITEM NO. IO. TO RECEIVE AN UPDATE REPORT IN REGARD TO THE A8 RURAL
WATER MEASURE - WASTEWATER TREATMENT FOR CRAUGHWELL AND
CLARINBRIDGE.
Mr. U. Finn, Director of Service gave an update report in regard to the A8 Rural
Water Measure — Wastewater Treatment for Craughwell and Clarinbridge.
Cllr. Kinnane raised the following points and queries:
• Very important and detailed report which lays out exactly what is happening.
• Important message is that Galway County Council is not blocking the
development.
• Lack of confidence in the Government in relation to the other 7 settlements.
Page 7 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
• Cannot accept the additional conditions, particularly when this function was
transferred to Uisce Eireann.
Cllr. Kinane requested to submit an amended Notice of Motion — Item No. 15.
ITEM NO. 11 CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 02.03.2026 — Resolution Letter from Galway County Council to
Minister James Browne, Department of Housing, Local Government &
Heritage — Resolution Letter -Croi Cönaithe (Towns)Fund Scheme.
Email dated 22.05.2026 from Megan Woods, Private Secretary to Minister
Browne — reply to Resolution Letter dated 02.03.2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to An Taoiseach
Michéal Martin — Resolution letter — Israeli Settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 03.06.2026 from Galway County Council to An Taoiseach —
Follow up email to Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to National Transport
Authority — Resolution Letter — Additional Services on 424 Route.
Email dated 1 1.06.2026 from Jeremy Ryan, Director of Public Transport
Services, National Transport Authority — Reply to Resolution letter dated
1 1.05.2026.
Letter dated 11.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Department of
Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution — Grants for Domestic
Waste-Water Treatment.
Email dated 04.06.2026 from Megan Woods, Private Secretary to Minister
Browne — Reply to letter dated 1 1.05.2026.
Letter dated 27.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Jennifer
Carroll MacNeill, Minister for Health — Resolution — Statutory Medicat
Appointment Leave.
Page 8 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Email dated 29.05.2026 from Joann Lynch, Private Secretary to Minister
Jennifer Carroll MacNeill, acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated
27.05.2026.
Email dated 12.06.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister@welfare.ie -
forwarded Resolution letter to section recommended by office of Minister for
Health.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Peter Burke,
Resolution letter — Statutory Medical Appointment Leave.
Email dated 03.06.2026 from Kevin Lowney, office of the Minister for
Enterprise, Tourism and Employment — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter
dated 28.05.2026.
Email dated 03.06.2026 from Carl Keating, Department of Enterprise, Tourism
and Employment — advising email has been forwarded.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Dara
Calleary, Minister for Social Protection Resolution Letter — Statutory Medical
Appointment Leave.
Letter dated 28.052026 from Galway County Council to Electric Skyline —
Resolution Letter — Lights on Poles within County Galway.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister for Health
Helen McEntee — Resolution Letter — CETA Trade Agreement.
Email dated 29.05.2026 from Paul Gibbons Private Secretary to Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated
29.05.2026.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to An Taoiseach
Michéal Martin — Resolution letter — CETA Trade Agreement.
Letter dated 02.06.2026 from Ciara Mahon, Department of the Taoiseach —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 28.05.2026,
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution CETA Trade
Agreement.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Norma Foley
— Resolution Letter — Urgent Review of Maternity, Paternity & Parental Leave.
Page 9 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Email dated 29.05.2026 from Office of the Minister for Children, Disability and
Equality — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 28.05.2026.
Letter dated 28.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Peter Burke,
Minister for Enterprise, Tourism & Employment — Resolution Urgent review of
Maternity, Paternity & Parental Leave.
Email dated 03.06.2026 from Kevin Lowney, office of the Minister for
Enterprise, Tourism and Employment — acknowledgement of Resolution letter
dated 28.05.2026.
Email dated 29.05.2026 — Circulation to Local Authorities of Resolution letters
for item 16 on May Agenda — Resolution letter — CETA Trade Agreement.
Email dated 29.05.2026 from South Dublin County Council —
Acknowledgement of email with Resolution letters on CETA Trade
Agreement.
Email dated 29.05.2026 from Sligo County Council — Acknowledgement of
email with Resotution letters on CETA Trade Agreement.
Email dated 29.05.2026 from Fingal County Council — Acknowledgement of
email with Resolution letters on CETA Trade Agreement.
Letter dated 03.06.2026 from Limerick City & County Council — Resolution
letter — Personal Taxes and Universal Charge.
Letter dated 11.06.2026 from Wexford County Council — Resolution letter —
abolition of Universal social Charge.
There were no matters arising.
ITEM NO. ll(a) CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
Repon dated June 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
• Report from Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services on Galway to Athlone
Greenway Project
Mr. U. Finn, Director of Service gave an overview of report outlining that Transport
Infrastructure Ireland (TII) has approved the progression of the Galway to Athlone
Greenway project. The project will advance in phases commencing with Sectionl:
Athlone to Shannonbridge (27km).
Page 10 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Cllrs. Harney, McHugh Farag, McCiearn, Parsons, Donohue, Ö Curraoin, Kelly,
Kinnane, Feeney, Geraghty, M. Connolly and Regan raised the following points
and queries:
Would like to see initial phase extended to Ballinasloe, it would make more
sense to continue through state owned lands as far as Ballinasloe.
What Local Authority is taking the lead in the next Phase? Westmeath was
the previous lead.
The project has been ongoing for several years and not much progression.
Significant taxpayers money has already been spent on this project with little
progress to show for it. There are many other pressing funding requirements
across other service areas, including footpath improvements and Safe Routes
to School initiatives, it is difficult to justify continuing with this project.
RPS highlighted before they pulled out of this project that it was undeliverable.
Hugely disappointing Phase for Ballinasloe, A&B has now been broken into 5
phases.
National Greenway Action Association have done great work. They
presented to members of the Oireachtas on behalf of farmers, landowners.
Is the previous Section 85, is redundant?
CPO process results in farms being segregated.
Roads & footpaths in Gort area not maintained, hedges overgrown.
Footpath that the Council constructed near Hennellys, Gort. The Area Office
has advised that it will not be responsible for the maintenance of this footpath.
Better planning should have been undertaken, and the Motorway should have
been incorporated into the project at the time to ensure a more coordinated
approach.
Since 2007 Kilmeen Junction has not changed and is a real issue.
Dangerous junction that needs to be realigned and lit up. TII have not given
the go ahead for these works.
Page 11 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Large part of project enters Maree, Middle Third. Commitments have been
given to residents that they will be kept informed at every stage of the project.
Will this commitment continue, and will all relevant information be
communicated to them?
Clarification on proposal to advance the Athlone to Shannonbridge phase
sought.
Is there a need for this project? Who is going to maintain it? Should be listed
as an Agenda item for further discussion.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by The Chief Executive:
The Chief Executive outlined that he would revert to the Members with regard to the
amount of funding spent on the project to date.
He stated that Galway County Council will act as the lead authority in respect of
sections of the Greenway that goes through County Galway and where any section
of the project extends into another local authority area, an appropriate arrangement
will be put in place with the relevant local authority.
He clarified that he has no control over funding allocations to Greenway & Active
Travel Projects and that this is a direct function of TII and NTA. This project is
important for County Galway and will have significant economic benefits for the
County. Any part of the project located within our area will not require a new Section
85 Agreement.
He indicated that he would convey to TII the concerns raised by Elected Members.
ITEM 12. QUESTION Cllr. Shaun Cunniffe
Cllr. Cunniffe submitted the following question to the meeting:
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed new building /extension
discussed at previous plenary meeting. In particular, the likely cost and how it could
Page 12 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
be paid for. Could the Chief Executive also inform me on where this proposal is
within the decision-making process of the council and the next formal interaction with
Councillors for consideration of this proposal'.
The following reply issued:
In September 2025, following detailed consideration of a report on a proposal for the
consolidation of office accommodation on the Prospect Hill site, it was unanimously
agreed by plenary council to mobilise project governance and proceed with the
procurement process and appointments of a combined Independent Project
Manager and Cost Manager and the appointment of an Integrated Design Team
under a single commission. This was to enable the project to move to the next
stage, design, costings and planning.
As outlined in the update provided in the April Management Report, the procurement
process for the appointment of both the Independent Project Manager and Cost
Manager and the appointment of an Integrated Design Team are progressing. It is
anticipated that the appointment of the Independent Project Manager and Cost
Manager will be finalised in June 2026 with the appointment of the Integrated Design
Team to follow in July/August 2026.
The cost estimate for the project was detailed at the workshop held with the
Members in September 2025. The brief for the Independent Project Manager and
Cost Manager includes exploring all potential funding options for the project. All
possible revenue funding streams for the project will be explored, grants, national
funding, Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEA!) grants. Engagement has and
will continue to take place with the Housing Finance Agency to explore the potential
to draw down capital funding, associated interest rates and terms. This will be
brought before the Members in due course as a Reserved Function.
A staff oversight committee has been established, initial engagement with trade
unions has taken place and consultation and engagement with Members, staff and
relevant stakeholder will remain an integral element of the project. The Members
will continue to have a key decision-making role in the project. A further update will
be provided to the Members following the conclusion of the current procurement
process.
Page 13 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Cllr. Cunniffe raised the following points and queries:
How is the project to be funded and queried whether financing would be
obtained through a loan? Will it disrupt services going forward? Would like
to see a more detailed report. What is the anticipated timeframe for delivery
of the build? What is the latest estimate of costs and the preferred option?
Cllr. Cunniffe queries were responded to as follows by Mr. M. Owens:
The details of this project were outlined at the September 2025 meeting and
received the unanimous approval of the Members to proceed to the next
stage which included design, costings and planning.
An update on the Office Accommodation Project was provided in the April
2026 Management Report detailing the procurement process for the
Independent Project and Cost Manager and the Integrated Design Team.
An Independent Project and Cost Manager will be appointed to the Office
Accommodation Project in June 2026.
The Independent Project and Cost Manager will review and explore all
funding and grant opportunities.
The final decision regarding the project and any associated borrowing
requirements is a Reserved Function of the Council.
Elected Members will be kept informed as the project progresses, as it is still
at a very early stage of development.
ITEM 13. QUESTION Cllr. Geraldine Donohue
Cllr. Geraldine Donohue submitted the question to the meeting:
"To ask the Director of Services what is the update on the targeted approach of
identifying the road side hedges and dangerous ash dieback affected trees that are a
matter of public safety"
The following reply issued:
Page 14 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
The Motion agreed by the Members requested that an information flyer be developed
setting out the responsibilities of landowners, homeowners and property owners in
relation to roadside hedges and roadside trees, particularly where there is a public
safety issue.
The Council is progressing this on a targeted basis through the Municipal District
offices and Roads staff. The focus is on locations where overgrown hedges, roadside
vegetation or trees are affecting road safety, including sightlines, junction visibility,
road signage, public lighting, footpaths, school routes, bends and narrow sections of
road.
It remains the responsibility of the landowner or occupier to ensure that trees, hedges
and other vegetation on their lands do not interfere with the safe use or maintenance
of the public road. Where an issue is identified, the Council may first seek voluntary
compliance by contacting the landowner. Where necessary, formal notices may issue
under the Roads Act 1993 requiring cutting, trimming, felling or removal of the relevant
hedge, tree or vegetation.
The information flyer will be used to support this targeted approach. It sets out the
responsibilities of landowners and property owners, explains the road safety issues
arising from overgrown hedges and roadside trees, and advises that the Council may
take further action where necessary. It is intended to use the flyer in areas where
particular problems have been identified. Copies will be on display in the Municipal
District offices and copies will also be provided to each Councillor for their reference.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following points and queries:
It was noted that this is a positive step.
• Requested a copy of the Information Flyer that is to be distributed.
Suggested that progress and feedback be monitored.
ITEM 14. RECOMMENDATION FROM TUAM MUNICIPAL DISTRICT.
The following recommendation was submitted prior to the meeting:
That in light of Galway LGFA's communications with Councillors explaining the
urgent need to secure land to develop a Centre of Excellence for the promotion of
Page 15 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Ladies Football in Galway, that we suppott Galway LGFA's request that circa 25
acres of the publicly owned Galway Airport Site be allocated for Community &
Sporting purposes and allocated to Galway LGFA as a community dividend.
They currently own no land or premises and this is making the management and
promotion of Ladies Football practically impossible, we wish to support their
invaluable work that has such a positive effect on girls and ladies throughout
Galway.
The following reply issued:
On 13th May 2026, the Secretary of Galway LGFA emailed the Chief Executive
seeking 20—30 acres of the site for a Centre of Excellence for Galway LGFA.
A previous letter was sent in 2024 by Galway GAA/LGFA seeking the site for Galway
GAA, and a response was issued at that time.
The below outlines the position of Galway County Council and this was sent to the
Galway LGFA on the 15th of May 2026 and there has been no subsequent
correspondence.
The issue of auxiliary uses of the site at the former Galway Airport is one that was
previously discussed by Councillors and Management.
Agreement was reached that the primary use of the site as set out in Chapter 5 in
the Galway County Development Plan is for economic growth and employment
creation, the inclusion of uses such as recreation and open space development will
be part of future proposals for the site but again will be ancillary to the primary
economic use.
Galway County Council and Galway City Council sought expressions of interest via a
publicly advertised process last year.
These bids were reviewed and interviewed over the last few weeks and the report
from that process is being compiled by the expert group appointed. When the report
is complete, the elected members will be notified of the contents and outcome.
I would also advise that the site is an earmarked site under national, regional and
local planning policy as a strategic site for economic development. In summary, the
development of a specific venue for one sporting organisation is not in keeping with
the County Development Plan.
Page 16 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Cllr. Cunniffe raised the following points and queries in relation to reply he
received:
Acknowledged his error in raising this item at Tuam MD and noted that it is a
matter for Athenry-Oranmore MD, as the airport is located in that Municipal
District.
Expressed his disagreement that the site would be used for industrial
purposes and that it was not appropriate for the development to proceed
without delivering a community dividend or benefit to the local area.
Cllr. McClearn, Keane, Feeney, Grealish and Charity raised the following points
and queries:
How many Expressions of Interests were received?
Concern is that people who made expressions of interest have gone to
expense and that alt such submissions should be considered.
If the Terms of Reference were changed at this stage, the matter could
ultimately end up before the courts.
Has legal advice been sought in relation to this matter.
Process should now continue to proceed, and that it would not be appropriate
to go back and change it at this stage.
Joint decision for the Elected Members of Galway County and Galway City
Council's and site cannot be sold until agreement is reached.
Sporting organisations do not have the financial funds to acquire lands
themselves and if the Council doesn't take action to support them and fight on
their behalf there may be no provision for future sporting facilities in the area.
Requested a copy of Tender Advert and clarity sought on the closing date.
Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. L. Hanrahan:
• Expressions of interest documents were circulated to all Elected Members.
Copy of Tender Advert was emailed to all Elected Members and publicly
advertised on our website and newspapers.
Page 17 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Six Applications went through the process and a Review Report will be
provided. Report will be considered by the CPG and will subsequently be
brought before the Plenary Council for consideration in due course.
There will be an appropriate recreational element included as part of this site
in line with the current County Development Plan objectives.
ITEM 15. NOTICE OF MOTION
Cllr. Martina Kinane submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
l, Cllr Martina Kinane, propose that Galway County Council approve the securing of
a loan of €2.6 million to provide the necessary match funding required to progress
the Clarinbridge & Craughwell Wastewater Schemes.
This will enable the Council to draw down the approved departmental funding and
proceed with the delivery of this vital infrastructure project.
Background to Motion:
The Government approved increased funding in November 2025 under the Rural
Water Programme for the Clarinbridge & Craughwell Wastewater Schemes.
Revised total project cost: €29.9 million
Departmental funding: €27.3 million
Galway County Council co-funding: €2.6 million
The advancement of this scheme is contingent on the availability of 8% (€2.6 million)
match funding from Galway County Council. In this context, it is proposed that
Galway County Council secure a loan of €2.6 million to meet the required
contribution and unlock the progression of the project.
This investment is essential to advance critical wastewater infrastructure in
Clarinbrjdge & Craughwell, facilitating sustainable development, protecting
Page 18 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
environmental standards, and ensuring that Galway County Council meets its
obligations under planning and environmental legislation.
Cllr. Kinane requested to submit an amended Notice of Motion
l, Cllr Martina Kinane, propose that Galway County Council approve the
securing of a loan of €2.6 million to provide the necessary match funding required to
progress the Clarinbridge & Craughwell Wastewater Schemes.
This will enable the Council to draw down the approved departmental funding and
proceed with the delivery of this vital infrastructure project.
Background to Motion:
The Government approved increased funding in November 2025 under the Rural
Water Programme for the Clarinbridge & Craughwell Wastewater Schemes.
Revised total project cost: €29.9 million
Departmental funding: €27.3 million
Galway County Council co-funding: €2.6 million
The advancement of this scheme is contingent on the availability of 8% (€2.6 million)
match funding from Galway County Council. In this context, it is proposed that
Galway County Council secure a loan of €2.6 million to meet the required
contribution and unlock the progression of the project.
This investment is essential to advance critical wastewater infrastructure in
Clarinbridge & Craughwell, facilitating sustainable development, protecting
environmental standards, and ensuring that Galway County Council meets its
obligations under planning and environmental legislation.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kinane SECONDED by Cllr. Canning the above motion
was AGREED.
Page 19 of 30
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
4690
Cllr. Evelyn Francis Parsons submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to
the meeting:
That Galway County Council calls on the Minister for Finance and the Government to
set out a clear pathway towards the phased abolition of the Universal Social Charge
(USC), commencing from January 2027, recognising that the USC was introduced
as a temporary emergency measure during the financial crisis and continues to place
a disproportionate burden on workers and families amid ongoing cost-of-living
pressures.
The Council further calls on Government to ensure that any reform or abolition of the
USC is implemented in a fair, balanced and fiscally sustainable manner, avoiding
increases in Income Tax or PRSI and safeguarding essential frontline public
services.
Context
The USC was introduced at a time of exceptional national financial difficulty and was
presented as a temporary measure. More than fifteen years later, many workers
continue to face significant pressures arising from housing costs, childcare,
insurance, energy bills and the general cost of living, while also experiencing
substantial deductions from earnings once Income Tax, PRSI and USC are
combined
There is huge concern that the USC disproportionately impacts ordinary workers and
acts as a disincentive to additional work and overtime at a time when Ireland is
seeking to retain skilled workers, support families and address wider affordability
pressures.
This motion does not seek to undermine the funding of essential public services, but
rather calls for a fairer and more proportionate long-term taxation model that reflects
current economic conditions rather than emergency-era measures.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Parsons SECONDED by Cllr. Donohue the above
motion was AGREED.
Page 20 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Cllr. Parsons raised the following points and queries in relation to reply he
received:
• There is a cost of living crisis and we need to support the workers; they should
not be still paying this Universal Social Charge.
• There needs to be a fairer, balanced approach.
Cllr. Donohue, McClearn, D. Connolly raised the following points and queries:
If this charge is abolished, what assurances can be provided that it will not be
replaced by another form of taxation or levy?
If you take away one form of tax, something else will be introduced to replace
it.
Understand that families are under pressure, but the government are now
reliant on this tax and there will be a shortfall.
It was suggested that consideration be given by the Government to
introducing a wealth tax in the next budget.
ITEM 17. NOTICE OF MOTION
Cllr. Shaun Cunniffe submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
That Galway County Council Recognises that Oshi Software Limited, trading as
Tickets.ie, ceased trading in early June 2026 and has moved to enter liquidation;
Notes that Tickets.ie was one of largest independent ticketing platforms operating in
the State, that its services were significantly relied upon by non-profit, community,
sporting and independent festivals and events, and that its sudden collapse has left
organisers across the country unable to recover ticket revenues already collected on
their behalf— with affected festivals, including the Rory Gallagher International
Festival, Rockathon and Cowboys and Heroes, reported to be collectively owed in
the region of €580, 000;
Acknowledges that many of these events operate on tight or voluntary margins and
fall during the summer season now under way, such that the loss of these funds
Page 21 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
threatens the viability of events with genuine cultural, social and economic value to
communities in this county and nationwide;
Notes with concern that there is currently no specific regulatory regime requiring
primary ticketing agents to ring-fence or protect monies held on behalf of event
promoters and ticket-buyers — protections that exist in comparable sectors;
Resolves to write to the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and Employment, Peter
Burke TD, and the Minister for Culture, Communications and Sport, Patrick
O'Donovan TO, to:
(i) request their intervention on behalfofthe festival and event organisers
affected by the cessation of trading by Tickets.ie;
(ii) call for the introduction, as a matter of priority, of regulation of the ticketing
sector — including measures to safeguard funds held on behalf of promoters
and consumers — so as to prevent a recurrence of these difficulties; and
(iii) request that available supports and funding within their Departments be
mobilised to assist the events and organisers affected;
And further resolves to forward a copy of this motion to the Association of Irish Local
Government (AILG) and to neighbouring local authorities, with a request that they
adopt a similar position.
Cllr. Cunniffe and Thomas raised the following points:
• We need to ringfence money for this issue.
• Information should be sought from the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and
Employment
Cllr. Thomas questioned whether could this Notice of Motion could be
amended to remove Section 1 of the Notice of Motion.
The Chief Executive advised the Elected Members that no decision should be taken
on this Notice of Motion. He advised that comments and concerns could be raised
and noted, but that no further action should be taken at this stage.
The Elected Members noted the advice of The Chief Executive in relation to this
Notice of Motion.
Page 22 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
ITEM 18. NOTICE OF MOTION
Cllr. Geraldine Donohue submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
"That the Director of Services provide a statement on the 2023 funding in the amount
of €50, 000 for Design Measures for Kilmeen Cross for the putting in place a
roundabout and lights on the N65 Galway Site and timelines on the delivery of same
at this very dangerous junction".
The following reply issued:
The Emerging Preferred Option for the N65 Kilmeen Cross minor improvement
scheme was identified in 2022. Galway County Council confirms that TII grant
funding of €50, 000 was allocated in 2023 in respect of design measures for Kilmeen
Cross on the N65.
This allocation was for the progression of design and assessment work in relation to
potential improvement measures at the junction. It was not a construction allocation
for the delivery of a roundabout, traffic lights or public lighting works.
In 2023 tenders were sought for Technical Consultancy Services to progress this
project through the design, environmental assessments, and statutory processes
however the tendered amounts received were considered prohibitively high. It was
then agreed with Transport Infrastructure Ireland that the project would be designed
by Galway County Council Road Design Section. A preliminary design was
completed in 2024. The project will be progress through the Roads Design Office.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following points and queries:
• Noted that the Roads Design Office will now be progressing the project. She
queried the Chief Executive regarding his confidence in the Roads Design
Office team to successfully deliver the project and the anticipated timelines for
its completion.
Page 23 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
The Chief Executive replied as follows:
He advised Cllr. Donohue that he has the utmost confidence in the Road Design
Team in delivering this project. He indicated that he would request Mr. Sean
Devaney, Senior Engineer to provide an update on this Project at the next Municipal
District meeting.
ITEM 19. NOTICE OF MOTION
Cllr. Evelyn Francis Parsons submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to
the meeting:
"Housing Options for Older People
I will propose:
That, in view of Census data demonstrating a substantial increase in the number of
people aged 65 years and over in County Galway, together with projections showing
continued population ageing in the years ahead, and recognising the importance of
enabling older people to live independently, safely and with dignity within their own
communities for as long as possible in accordance with the objectives of the Galway
City and County Age Friendly Strategy,
Galway County Council recognises the need to plan proactively for a broad range of
housing options for older people and requests the Chief Executive to bring forward a
report on the potential role of retirement villages, as well as downsizing and
rightsizing opportunities, age-friendly housing developments and other appropriate
housing models in meeting the current and future housing needs of older people in
the county.
The following reply issued:
Galway County Council have and continued to provide Age Friendly Housing as
outlined in our Housing Delivery Action Plan associated with the Dept of Housing
action plan "Housing for All".
Page 24 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
A new Housing Delivery Action Plan associated with the Dept of Housing plan
"Delivering Homes, Building, Communities "has just commenced and Age friendly
housing will be included in this plan
Galway County Council will share this report on its completion and will address all
available options to address the needs of older people in the county.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. E. Parsons SECONDED by Cllr. D. Connolly the
above motion was AGREED.
Cllr. Parsons, D. Connolly, D. Collins, Donohue and Hoade raised the following
points and queries:
Have been contacted by older persons in Ballinasloe in relation to their
concerns about the future of services in the area.
Need to be designing for the future as there is a higher than average older
population living in Ballinasloe area and need to identify sites to provide the
services they need.
Need to support right sizing in housing allocation policy and tenant owned
homes.
There are 26,000 aged over 66 in County Galway, national trends show
increasing to 52,000 by 2040.
We need to create Retirement Villages.
Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. D. Mitchell:
Proactively dealing with Age Friendly Housing.
New Housing Plan has particular emphasis on the need for Age Friendly
Housing.
Housing Delivery Action Plan to be delivered over next few months which
considers all the issues outlined in relation to an ageing population. Once
complete it will be an Agenda Item for consideration by elected members.
Acknowledge comments regarding right sizing and will take them into account.
Voids turnover time is an issue for the Council, and the Department has
acknowledged same.
Page 25 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
• The provision of Retirement Villages will also be considered as part of the
housing delivery action plan.
ITEM NO. 20 CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
Comh/CIlrs. Ö Curraoin, Feeney, Killilea and Regan raised the following raised
the following points and queries:
Highlighted the significant increase in train passenger numbers, noting that it
is very encouraging to see the growing use of rail services. They also noted
the progress being made on works on the service Athenry - Claremorris and
welcomed the substantial investment and effort being undertaken to improve
rail services as part of the Western Rail Corridor. Members acknowledged the
excellent work being carried out and the positive benefits it will bring to the
region.
Complemented Housing and Roads on their great success in receiving
funding under the Housing Activation Fund, resulting in serious investment
coming into the County. Next Phase is the Athenry Northern Relief Road /
Northern Ring Road project. The project is intended to unlock land for
housing.
Raised the issue of Kilbannon Group Water Scheme. He advised that Group
Scheme are spending a huge amount of money fixing leaks and they are
running out of money.
Requested to receive an update on the Taking in Charge application.
Looked for an update on the camera located at by-pass in Tuam. Heavy
goods vehicles are driving through the town.
Complemented the outdoor workers the excellent service they provide. Since
2021 the budget has increased by 40%. He asked what plans are in place to
recruit more outdoor workers. He outlined that he had submitted notice of
motion money for the repair of footpaths, and he was advised that this work
could not be carried out until September.
Page 26 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
The Chief Executive replied as follows:
The Chief Executive outlined that Irish Rail and Galway County Council have done
exceptional work in relation to the Western Rail Corridor project delivery. He stated
that double tracking is required between Athenry and Ceannt Station which will
facilitate an hourly service between Galway and Dublin and that he would continue to
lobby for same. He outlined that funding has been received from the Rural
Regeneration and Development Fund for Phase I — Athenry to Claremorris and that
construction works will be carried out by Irish Rail.
Galway County Council were successful in receiving funding for 6 Capital Projects as
part of the Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund and he complemented Mr. L.
Hanrahan & Mr. D. Mitchell, Directors of Service and their teams for all their work in
this area.
In relation to the Outdoor Staff there are provisions in the Workforce Plan to increase
the outdoor staff numbers. The Road's budget has also increased and where Galway
County Council doesn't have the capacity to carry out the works themselves
contractors will be employed.
Mr. U. Finn replied as follows:
He advised that the issue with Kilbannon GWS had being raised with Uisce Eireann
and that Galway County Council are also working with the Group Water Scheme in
relation to same. He advised that he would provide an update to Elected Members
in relation to this issue.
He advised that he is not aware of the camera that is located on the Tuam Bypass,
but that he would check same with the Tuam MD and revert to the Elected Members.
Cllrs. McHugh, M. Connolly, Killilea, McHugh, Harney, Geraghty, King,
Mannion, Turner, Parsons, Hoade, Regan raised the following raised the
following points and queries:
Page 27 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
Outlined that here is huge frustration in relation to the issues with Kilbannon
GWS. They are looking for an opportunity to sit down with a member of staff
and have a discussion on same.
CCTV cameras are badly needed at Tuam Coral Leisure. Illegal dumping is
a huge issue.
Identified direct points of contact to be put in place within Uisce Éireann, as
correspondence seems to be going into a black hole. He looked for
Updates requested in relation to: Affordable Housing Scheme for Ballinasloe,
Rail services from Ballinasloe, dual tracking is essential, Woodlawn new
platform is required and need to roil out a second platform.
As it is Rally season we need to do something about the dangerous junction,
there are also overgrown hedges, vehicle mirrors getting damaged, need to
bring the hedge cutting season forward.
Issue of the parking arrangements for parking in Galway City and the
requirement now that you have to use an App to pay, pay machines no longer
in use. He advised this new system is causing distress to older people
especially to those who are not used to using this kind of technology and they
are receiving parking fines now because of the new system in place to pay for
your parking.
Issue of water supply in rural areas where people are not on a public supply.
There needs to be a financial investment in this area, and we need to raise
this issue with the Department.
In relation to summer ready there is a real issue with parking at beaches.
There is concern that, in the event of an emergency, an ambulance may be
unable to access the area due to road congestion caused by parked vehicles.
Urged the members to support Milltown Railway Station; there is a double
track at this location.
Illegal dumping at clothes banks. Can these banks be emptied more
frequently as the Tidy Towns Committee have requested that this happen.
Can hedge cutting commence on the Primary and National roads and
clarification sought if exceptional circumstances applies only to minor roads?
Can CCTV be installed at the bring banks
Page 28 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
In relation to hedge cutting, it was acknowledged that not all junctions can be
addressed at this time of year. However, it was emphasised that hedge
cutting should be carried out where there are visibility issues at dangerous
junctions, as this is a road safety matter and could potentially result in serious
accidents or fatalities if not addressed.
Update requested on when the audio system will be upgraded in the Council
Chamber.
The Chief Executive noted the sentiments expressed in relation to parking in Galway
City. He advised that he would bring the matter to the attention of the Chief
Executive of Galway City Council.
Mr. U. Finn replied as follows:
He outlined that Uisce Éireann, are responsible for water and wastewater
connections.
In relation to hedge cutting additional funding is required. There are restrictions in
place in relation to carrying out this service during bird nesting season.
Ms. E. Ruane replied as follows:
In relation to CCTV at bring banks, an agreed approach is in place with our ICT
Department.
There may be a possibility to increase frequency of collection service for clothes
banks.
There are plans to re-introduce CCTV at Mountbellew as soon as possible.
Ms. D. Mitchell replied as follows:
In relation to Affordable Housing in Ballinasloe, discussions are still ongoing and that
there are 2 schemes being considered at the moment.
Ms. K. O'Connor replied as follows:
Page 29 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 22nd June 2026
It is planned to do this audio upgrade work in the Chamber in August.
The Cathaoirleach concluded the meeting and requested that, at future meetings,
Elected Members focus on discussing issues relevant to the Plenary meeting and
that discussions relating specifically to individual Municipal Districts should, where
appropriate, be raised and considered at Municipal District level.
ITEM NO. 21 VOTES OF SYMPTAHY/CONGRATULATIONS.
Mike Sheil, Clonlee, Duniry, Kylebrack, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Annie Shaughnessy, Tynagh, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Teresa Pierce, Tomany, Kylebrack, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Gerry Lawless, Duniry, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Mark Lynch, Caheronaun Park, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Tony McKeogh & Family, Raheen, Kilchreest, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Christina Duane & Family, Gortroe, Ardrahan, Co. Galway
Maggie Murray & Family, Earlspark, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Elected Members wished to extend their congratulations to Harry Lloyd on his
achievement in winning Gold at the Special Olympics Ireland Summer Games
2026.
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
Page 30 of 30