Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at ARAS AN CHONTAE PROSPECT HILL
Monday. 27th April at 1.00pm
LEAS CATHAOIRLEACH•.
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Bail':
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Cllr. M. Hoade
Leas Cathaoirleach of the County of
Galway
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, D. Connolly,
M.
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. Ö Curraoin,
p.
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty,
Grealish, L. Harney, C. Keane, D. Kelly,
D.
Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Lee, M. Maher,
s.
McHugh Ryan, A. Reddington, M. Regan, N
Thomas, O. Turner and T. Welby.
Comh. /Cllr. l. Canning, J. Charity,
G.
Donohue, A. Harney, P. Keaveney,
M.
Kinane, G. King, M. Leainde, E. Mannion, J.
McClearn, K. McHugh Farag, M. McNamara,
E. F. Parsons and S. Walsh.
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr.
Michael Owens, Director of Services, Mr.
Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services, Ms. E.
Ruane, Director of Services, Ms. K.
O'Connor, Head of Finance,
Mr. D. Mitchell,
Director of Services, Ms. V. Loughnane
Moran, Senior Planner, Ms. J. Brann
Meetings Administrator, Ms. L. Keady,
A/Senior Executive Officer,
Ms. U. Ni
Eidhin, Administrative Officer Ms. H.
Page 1 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. C. Connolly Staff
Officer.
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
The Elected Members contesting the upcoming bye-election were wished every
success by the Leas Cathaoirleach.
ITEM NO.I CONFIRMATION OF MiNUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Comh. O Curraoin the
minutes of the Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 23rd March 2026 were AGREED.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4716
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Regan the minutes of the
Corporate Policy Group held on 16th March 2026 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the minutes
of the Economic Development, Enterprise & Pianning Strategic Policy Committee
Meeting held on 3rd December 2025 were NOTED.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following point and query:
• Further to item 6, an update was requested on the County/City Economic
Development Strategy, as consultants were due to be confirmed following the
December meeting.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Grant Thornton are the appointed consultants for the County/City Economic
Development Strategy. Stakeholder engagement is taking place with the
Page 2 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
assistance of the economist from the Northern & Western Regional Authority
(NWRA). The draft document will be brought before the Elected Members.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. O Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. Broderick the
minutes of the Physical Development, Transportation and Emergency Services
Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on 10th December 2025 were NOTED.
Cllr. Donohue raised the following point and query:
• An update was sought on a previous motion requesting a targeted leaflet drop
to inform landowners of their responsibilities in relation to roadside trees.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
• Leaflet drops in targeted areas will be carried out. He will ask the Senior
Engineer to contact Cllr. Donohue directly on this matter.
• Ares of specific concern may be raised at Municipal District level.
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER AND ADOPT THE UNAUDITED ANNUAL FINANCIAL
STATEMENT FOR 2025.
4717
The Unaudited Annual Financial Statement for Galway County for the year ended
3 ISt December 2025 was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Ms. O' Connor, Director of Service Finance spoke on the Unaudited Annual Financial
Statement (AFS) for 2025 that was circulated to the Elected Members in advance of
the meeting. The statement has been presented to the Audit Committee and Corporate
Policy Group (CPG). The Statement was prepared within the Accounting Code of
Practice and Accounting Regulations for Local Authorities in Ireland, and under the
directions of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The primary
financial statements which make up the AFS are the Statement of Accounting Policies,
Statement of Comprehensive Income, Statement of Financial Position, Statement of
Funds Flow and Notes and Appendices to the Financial Statements. The External
Page 3 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Auditor will examine the accounts, however significant change is not expected. The
Unaudited AFS will be brought before the Members in September as the Audited
Annual Financial Statement.
The Executive is requesting that the Elected Members:
a) Adopt the enclosed figures to formally close the accounts for 2025.
b) Approve the transfers to / from reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the accounts.
c) Approve the over I under expenditure by division as noted in Note 16 of the
accounts.
Cllr. Regan raised the following points and queries:
• Clarification was sought on the amount of rates outstanding from the previous
year.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. O'Connor:
Uncollected rates have reduced, and the rate base has increased.
• The Council is working with Tailte Éireann to ensure accurate property
valuations for rating purposes.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
The Council's collection rates are above national average.
• The Council is mindful of the need to balance effective rate collection with the
sustainability of local businesses.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington it was AGREED
to adopt the figures as detailed in the Unaudited Annual Financial Statement for
Galway County Council for the year ended 31st December 2025 to formally close the
accounts for 2025.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was AGREED
to approve the transfers to / from reserves as detailed in Note 14 of the accounts.
Page 4 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. O Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was
AGREED to approve the over / under expenditure by division as noted in Note 16 of
the accounts.
ITEM NO.4 TO CONSIDER A REPORT TO AN COIMISIÜN PLEANÅLA UNDER
SECTION OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT ACT 2000. AS
AMENDED ON THE FOLLOWING
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT:
CONSTRUCTION OF AN OPEN-CYCLE GAS TURBINE POWER PLANT
PRIMARILY FUELED BY NATURAL GAS ABOVE GROUND INSTALLATION AND
ANCILLARY DEVELOPMENT LOCATED WITHIN COLLNAGROAGH AND
RATHMORRISSY (TOWNLANDS), ATHENRY, CO. GALWAY ACP - 324113-26.
4718
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Ms. Loughnane Moran, Senior Planner spoke on the report. The proposed
development of the Cashla Peaker Plant is for the construction of an open cycle gas
turbine plant, primarily fuelled by natural gas and ancillary development, including a
substation and connection from the substation to the existing Cashla substation. The
report was prepared within the legislative requirements of 37(E) of the Planning and
Development Act. The report contains a description of the proposed development, site
location, planning policy, relevant planning history, enforcement information relating
to the subject site, designated sites, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAR), Water
Framework Directive, planning considerations, recommended conditions and includes
a Road and Transportation Report. The report also includes a recommendation that it
would be appropriate for An Coimisiün Pleanåla to require the applicant to provide and
implement a community gain proposal.
A presentation has already been made to the Athenry Oranmore Municipal District
(MD), the chair of which has prepared a statement on the proposed development
which will be included in the report to be submitted to An Coimisiün Pleanåla. She
undertook to note any comments made at this meeting and attach them to the
submitted report also.
Page 5 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
The Chief Executive informed the Elected Members that Galway County Council are
not the decision-making authority for this application.
Cllr. Keane read out the following on behalf of the Members of the Athenry Oranmore
Municipal District:
'As Members of Galway County Council representing the Athenry Municipal District,
we are aware of the importance of our area in the context of infrastructure investment,
industrial development and balanced regional development. We are aware of the need
for a sustainable, secure energy supply and a robust electricity grid network.
To that end, Galway county has played a significant part in developing our energy
supply. We host a number of wind and solar farms with more in the pipeline. We have
an existing large gas powered electricity plant and an application for another. The
possibility of offshore wind development remains, despite recent decisions.
Regarding the present proposal, the Cashla Peaker Plant, SID Case Ref 324113 we
have a number of serious concerns regarding its development.
Environmental Concerns
The proposed site is in close proximity to Athenry town. Prevailing winds would direct
any emissions towards a growing town of 5,000 people with daily student numbers of
3,500 in five schools. There is a significant residential zoning in the adjacent townland
of Ballygurrane which will have the effect of extending the town towards the Peaker
Plant site.
We are conscious that this project is made up of 3 separate applications 1) the plant
2) the substation and pipeline and 3) the gas pipeline. We request that An Coimisiün
Pleanåla considers the cumulative impact of the entire project in making its decision.
We also request that An Coimisiün considers the emission levels in the context of the
700ha of land earmarked for industrial development within a 10km radius of the site.
Will the operation of the Peaker Plant restrict development on these lands in the future
under the cumulative effect provision? These lands are located at Ballygurrane
(Athenry), Tubberoe (Athenry) IDA and Department of Defence (Oranmore), Galway
Airport site (Carnmore).
In addition, a gas-fired peaker plant was refused planning permission in the same
general area in 2009 on concerns regarding air pollution, among others. We request
that this decision be taken into account in the consideration of this application.
Economic Corridor
Page 6 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
The site is located in the Galway — Athenry economic corridor (Galway County
Development Plan) which has had major investment over the decades in transport,
industrial development sites and housing. We are concerned that siting one of the
largest power plants of its type in the centre of this corridor will dimmish the
attractiveness of this nationally important area to significant projects and investments.
IDA Site
Some of the closest lands to the Peaker Plant site is owned by the IDA. There has
been significant investment in this site and an adjoining section of the IDA lands is the
subject of a €300m multinational investment. We have concerns that this wider land
holding will have its value and attractiveness eroded by the proximity of the power
station.
Local Services
We have concerns that the level of emergency services in the area are inadequate to
deal with any emergencies on-site. The storage of 6.2 million litres of diesel in
conjunction with a major gas main creates a considerable fire risk and would challenge
greatly the local fire services. This site will be a Lower Tier COMAH site under the
Seveso Directive, resulting in a higher requirement for both emergency planning and
capacity to deal with any emergency which may occur.
Impact on Local Roads and Road Safety
While the site is adjacent to the motorway it is served by local roads only. We have
concerns around the construction and operation of the plant and the impact it will have
on the L roads serving the site, the HGVs using the route and the increased road and
safety issues which will arise.
We request that an Coimisiün Pleanåla take the above concerns into account in
arriving at its decision on a project which would have a significant impact on the local
area, local residents and the economic development of this key area of Galway.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Keane SECONDED by Cllr. Feeney it was AGREED to
approve the report to An Coimisiün Pleanåla under Section 37(E)(4) of the Planning &
Development Act 2000, as amended on the following - Proposed Development:
Construction of an open-cycle gas turbine power plant, primarily fueled by natural gas,
above ground installation and ancillary development, located within Collnagroagh and
Rathmorrissy (townlands), Athenry, Co. Galway ACP — 324113-26
Page 7 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Cllrs. Feeney, Broderick, McNamara, Grealish and Cunniffe raised the
following points and queries:
The proposed development site is located on the edge of Athenry town and
had been previously earmarked for development. It was questioned whether
the site was selected solely on the basis that it is currently for sale.
While there is recognition of the need to move away from fossil fuels, it is
essential that such developments are appropriately located. The siting of a
large power plant in close proximity to a town was not considered suitable.
It was emphasised that community concerns must be fully considered.
There is unanimous agreement among the Members of the Municipal District
in respect of this submission.
Athenry town is growing and expanding. Concern was raised that the pipes may
prohibit future potential development.
The suitability of the site was questioned and concerns were raised regarding
site access and regress to the site.
The current zoning of the land was enquired of. Lack of national guidelines or
energy strategy was criticised.
It was asked if reference to a previous refused application for a powerplant in
the area could be included in the report.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Loughnane:
It is national policy to support development in the move away from fossil fuels.
The decision on the application will be made by An Coimisiün Pleanåla.
The report outlines the governing national, regional and local guidelines.
There exists some confusion between wind, solar and natural gas guidelines.
The site is unzoned and it is within the economic corridor.
The previous application that was mentioned was from 2009, although it was
not an application. A development was discussed but didn't reach application
stage. She agreed that it would be referenced in the report to be submitted to
An Coimisiün Pleanåla.
Page 8 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
The Members agreed that reference to the previous proposal in 2009 be included in
the report that is to be submitted to An Coimisiün Pleanåla.
ITEM NO. 5. TO FIX A VENUE FOR THE MAY ORDINARY MEETING OF PLENARY
COUNCIL.
4719
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McHugh Ryan SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was agreed
that the May Ordinary Meeting of Plenary Council will be held on 25th May at llam in
the Claregalway Hotel, Claregalway, Co. Galway. The Members were informed that
this meeting will be an in-person meeting and it would not be possible to attend
remotely.
ITEM NO. 6 TO CONSIDER AND ADOPT THE ANNUAL REPORT 2025 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 221(1) (A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001
4720
The Annual Report 2025 was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Owens, Director of Services introduced the Draft Annual Report for 2025 which
was previously considered at Corporate Policy Group (CPG). He gave an overview
of the contents of the report which is now before the Elected Members. He asked
that it be considered and approved by the Members. Once approved, the report will
be translated, published to the Council website and available in public libraries.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the Annual
Report 2025 in accordance with section 221 (1) (A) of the Local Government Act
2001 was AGREED.
ITEM NO.7 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF
Page 9 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4721
Report dated 16th April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Turner SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was
AGREED to authorise Cllr. Parsons to attend 'Association of Irish Regions Training
Seminar 2026' at Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal on 25th & 26th
February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. Maher to attend 'AILG Elected Members Training Programme
March 2026 Module 2 — "Overview of New Housing for all Action Plan and Tenancy
Rights Implications for Local Authorities and Councillors' at Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo
on 21 March 2026 (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Regan it was AGREED
to authorise Cllrs. Turner, Maher & Mc Hugh Ryan to attend 'AILG Annual Training
Conference 2026' at Hotel Minella, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary on 22nd & 23rd April 2026
(Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO.8 TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF CONFERENCES
ATTENDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142 (5F) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4722
Report dated 16th April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the Summary of
Proceedings of conferences attended were NOTED.
ITEM NO.9 TO APPROVE THE ATTENDANCE OF A DELEGATION FROM
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL TO ATTEND THE UNESCO GLOBAL GEOPARKS
Page 10 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 2 7th April 2026.
CERTIFICATE CEREMONY AND ASSOCIATED BUSINESS MEETINGS AND
EVENTS.
4723
Report dated 20th April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish it was AGREED to
authorise Cathaoirleach Cllr. D. Collins to attend UNESCO Global Geoparks
Certificate Ceremony in Paris, France on 27th April 2026. The Director of Service Mr.
Liam Hanrahan and Heritage Officer Ms. Marie Mannion will accompany the
Cathaoirleach to the ceremony.
ITEM NO. 10. TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - APRIL 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4724
The Management Report — April 2026, in accordance with Section 136(2) of the Local
Government Act 2001 (As Amended) was NOTED.
Cllr. Mary Hoade, Leas Cathaoirleach spoke on her recent trip to Coventry to attend
the Galway Association Coventry 59th Annual Dinner and Dance with Ms. Katie
O'Connor, Director of Services. She spoke of the importance of maintaining
connections with those that have emigrated from Galway.
Cllrs. Donohue, D. Killilea, D. Connolly, Geraghty & A. Harney raised the
following points and queries:
Compliments were extended to the Gort Area Office staff for the repairs that
were carried out to the road verge and culvert at Cappard, Gort.
Thanks were extended to the organisers of the recent official opening of the
Michael McGrath Sensory Garden in Palace Grounds, Tuam.
The serious level of anti-social behaviour in Ballinasloe was highlighted. The
first meeting of the Anti-Social Behaviour Taskforce has taken place. It was
Page 11 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
asked that resources be allocated to the taskforce to deal with the anti-social
problems.
It was asked that a second Housing Liaison Officer (HLO) be appointed to
Ballinasloe.
The Council must play its part in remedying the situation in Ballinasloe.
It was asked if those causing anti-social behaviour in Ballinasloe can be
removed.
A co-ordinated approach to dealing with anti-social behaviour is required.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
• The official opening of the Michael McGrath Sensory Garden in Palace
Grounds, Tuam, will be included in the May Management Report.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
Assured the Members that the Executive are intensely aware of the problems
in Ballinasloe. The Elected Members were the driving force behind setting up
the Task Force.
The HLOs work on the ground and there is a close relationship between them,
the Tenancy & Estate Management Team and the Gardai.
If tenants do not conform with the conditions as set out in the Tenancy
Handbook this may lead to eviction.
It is difficult to resolve problems that originate from outside Ballinasloe town.
He assured the Members that the Council are aware of and are engaging to
resolve the issues as soon as possible.
ITEM NO. 11 UPDATE ON THE N6 GALWAY CITY RING ROAD
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4725
Mr. Finn, Director of Services gave the Elected Members an update on the N6 Galway
City Ring Road. The application to An Bord Pleanåla (now An Coimisiün Pleanåla) for
scheme of the Galway City Ring Road (N6-GCRR) was initially lodged in 2018. The
Page 12 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
decision was subsequently quashed under Judicial Review and An Coimisiün
Pleanåla, after reassessing the scheme including assessment of updated and
additional further information have now approved the scheme and the making of the
CPO. The Chief Executive and Director answered questions from Elected Members
including clarification on the respective roles of the County Council, the City Council
and Transport Infrastructure Ireland (T 11). It was clarified that under a Section 85
agreement made between the City Council and County Council, Galway County
Council were appointed the lead authority for the project. The steering group consists
of TII, Galway City and Galway County Councils.
The Chief Executive expanded that this is the most important piece of infrastructure
for Galway City and County. The 18km road will remove Heavy Goods Vehicles
(HGVs) from the city which will allow the city to grow. This in turn will benefit the
commercial, retail and residential sectors in the wider Galway Metropolitan Area. He
welcomed the positive decision from An Coimisiün Pleanåla. He hopes that the ring
road will proceed without further challenge, to allow the project to move to design
procurement and construction.
Cllrs./ Comh. D. Killilea, O Curraoin & Mannion raised the following points and
queries:
The positive response from An Coimisiün Pleanåla was widely welcomed.
The timelines for the project were asked.
Members expressed disappointment with the selected route, citing the
potential displacement of a significant number of families. It was asked
whether the impacted households would be granted planning permission for
alternative accommodation.
Homeowners along the agreed route must be engaged with.
Appreciation was expressed for the work and commitment of Council staff
over the lifetime of the project.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Any Judicial Review must be lodged within eight weeks of the notification of
the ACP decision in the local papers
Page 13 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 2 7th April 2026.
If a Judicial Review is not lodged, then project construction is anticipated to
commence in the period 2028 to 2031.
There has been continuous consultation between landowners and the NRO.
The GCRR is only part of the solution to traffic congestion in Galway City,
along with BusConnects, Active Travel and public transport.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
During the early stages of the process, 8 potential routes were assessed.
Following public consultation, a preferred route was established. The decision
on the final route was made by Reserved Function by both City Council and
County Councils. These decisions allowed the process to move forward with
the chosen route.
Cllrs. Welby, Leainde, & Thomas raised the following points and queries:
People affected by the GCRR were encouraged to contact the Council.
•
Resolution must be reached with those opposed to the GCRR.
Attention must now be given to addressing the shortcomings of the R336.
The decision has provided clarity for the homeowners affected and this is
welcomed. They must be assisted by the Council.
It was asked what the timelines would be should an appeal be lodged.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• The Council will be in direct communication with homeowners.
• The GCRR application underwent a thorough and comprehensive
assessment, including consideration of the Climate Act.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
•
Letters will issue shortly to property owners impacted by the decision.
The public are invited to make contact with the Project Office.
We will seek a mutually agreed pathway forward.
Page 14 of 32
Cllrs
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
. Feeney, Regan & Keane raised the following points and queries:
It was asked if a special unit will be established to carry out engagement with
property owners.
The GCRR will create capacity for other transport solutions.
Those impacted should be accommodated close to their current homes.
It was asked what supports will be offered to ensure that those affected may
remain in their communities.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Two additional senior staff members have been allocated to the National
Roads Office and additional resources will be allocated to this office.
An established process will be adhered in relation to the properties impacted.
Any subsequent planning applications will be considered on their merits but e
Planning Departments which is a separate statutory process.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
Upgrade works on the R336 were delayed until a decision was made on the
N6 GCRR.
The GCRR will allow Galway to develop sustainably and improve walking and
cycling routes, making it a safer place.
Cllrs./ Comh. Walsh, O Curraoin, King & Hoade raised the following points and
queries:
•
The decision from An Coimisiün Pleanåla is welcomed.
While the Ring Road is needed, the selected route serves only South
Connemara.
It was asked if the N59 to Clifden road is fit for purpose.
Page 15 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 2 7th April 2026.
The key message from the Council is that it maintains an open-door policy for
all those impacted by the ring road.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Expressed his thanks to the Members for their contributions.
• The GCRR will allow the city to grow which will facilitate community and
economic gain.
• The ring road has the financial support of government.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
There has been a lot of engagement with landowners, especially through oral
hearings. The Project Office will work with them. There is a dedicated website
and the office welcomes engagement from homeowners.
This project represents the collective efforts of many people over the last two
decades.
Work on the design and procurement elements of the project will continue
even if a Judicial Review is lodged. Any subsequent Judicial Review should
not delay the project, as work will proceed in parallel.
ITEM NO. 12 CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
4726
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation — Resolution letter — Issues with Mobile Phone
Coverage.
Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Commission for Communication Regulation —
Reply to Resolution letter dated 16.12.2025.
Page 16 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Jean Brann, County Secretary, Galway County
Council to Commission for Communication Regulation — Follow up to Reply
dated 16.12.26.
Letter dated 16.04.2026 from Commission for Communications Regulation —
Reply to Letter from Jean Brann, County Secretary dated 04.03.2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 to An Taoiseach Michéal Martin — Resolution Letter —
Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 11.03.2026 from Department of An Taoiseach —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 - Israeli Settlements
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 to An Taoiseach Michéal Martin — Resolution letter —
Increase provision of Irish Medium Education.
Letter dated 1 1.03.2026 from Department of An Taoiseach —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase in Irish
Medium Education.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 to An Taoiseach Michéal Martin — Resolution Letter —
Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory — circulated to
Oireachtas Members.
Email dated 06.04.2026 from Deputy John Connolly TD — Reply to circulation
of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 - Israeli Settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Bord Bia —
Resolution — Urgent Meeting to instigate dialogue.
Email dated 15.04.2026 from Michelle Jordan, Senior Agri Food
Communications Executive, Bord Bia — reply to Resolution letter dated
10.03.2026.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 to Minister Martin Heydon — Resolution letter —
Urgent Meeting to instigate dialogue.
Email dated 19.03.2026 from Maria Rigney, Private Secretary to Minister
Heydon — Reply to Resolution letter dated 10.03.2026.
Letter dated 26.01.2026 from Tanya Whyte, Assistant Director/Senior
Planner, Planning and Economic Development, Northern & Western Regional
Page 17 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 2 7th April 2026.
Assembly — Notification of Review of Regional Spatial & Economic Strategy
for NWRA 2020-2032.
Letter dated 07.04.2026 to Mr James Browne, Minister for Housing Local
Government & Heritage — Resolution letter — Short term letting.
Email dated 09.04.2026 from Megan Woods, Private Secretary to Minister
Browne — acknowledgement of Resolution Letter — Short Term Letting.
Letter dated 07.04.2026 to Coillte — Resolution letter — Coillte Financial
Contribution.
Cllrs. L. Harney & Regan raised the following points and queries:
• Dissatisfaction was expressed at the recent response from ComReg to
Council correspondence on poor network coverage. A consistent level of
service is required.
3 unsatisfactory responses have been received from ComReg.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• The drafted response to ComReg will be given to Cllr. Regan and Cllr. L.
Harney in advance of it being issued to ComReg.
ITEM 13. QUESTION Cllr. Donohue
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
4727
'To ask the Chief Executive to outline for the Council how the new Complaints
Procedure developed by the County and City Management Association in
conjunction with the Ombudsman will be implemented by Galway County Council'.
The following reply issued:
The new Customer Complaints Procedure and Protocol will be implemented through
its inclusion in the Customer Service Action Plan, adopted by the Members on 26th
Page 18 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
January 2026, which underpins the organisation's commitment to delivering good
customer service. Rollout will take place in 2026, led by the Customer Services
Officers Group, a cross-directorate group ensuring consistent implementation across
all Units. A standardised complaints-tracking system is already in use
organisation-wide, with quarterly reporting to Management Team underway.
The Ombudsman has developed a Complaints Handling Training e-module, and we
are liaising with the Ombudsman's Office to enable this module to be hosted within
our network so that all staff can complete the training. Galway County Council will
also participate in the Ombudsman's quarterly Complaints Standards Network to
support best practice and strengthen complaint handling across the organisation
ITEM 14. QUESTION Cllr. Cunniffe
Cllr. Cunniffe submitted the following question to the meeting:
'To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed update on negotiations between
Government and Galway County Council to correct the systematic inherent
4728
deficiency in funding we receive and to achieve a commensurate amount of LPT
Equalisation Funding or other monies to allow Galway County Council to provide a
baseline of services given our geographic area, population, local road network and
other service needs.
Please include information on meetings held subsequent to 24th March and the
participants, can you also provide a copy of the information GCC presented in any
meetings held. '
The following reply issued:
As the Elected Member is aware, Galway County Council has engaged with the
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH) over a number of
years in relation to the persistent and systemic funding deficit facing the authority.
Page 19 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 2 7th April 2026.
In the period up to and including 2026, a number of reports and correspondence
have been issued by Galway County Council to the DHLGH outlining the scale and
implications of this funding deficiency.
More recently, a number of further actions have been undertaken, including the
following:
Following correspondence issued to the Assistant Secretary (AS) in the
DHLGH on 10 December 2025, a further letter was issued on 16 February
2026 at the request of the Members. This correspondence reiterated the
ongoing funding challenges facing Galway County Council
In this letter, it was highlighted to the DHLGH that at both the Budget 2026
meeting and the January 2026 Plenary meeting, Councillors expressed
concern that the current approach to the redistribution of central Government
resources is "systematically failing County Galway".
On 30 March 2026, a Joint Oireachtas Meeting was convened in the Council
Chamber, attended by a representative group nominated by Plenary.
Nineteen Oireachtas Members were invited.
The principal agenda item for the meeting was "to correct the underfunding
allocated to Galway County Council by Central Government".
The presentation focused on
o
O
o
the extent to which Galway County Council is structurally underfunded
relative to comparator local authorities and national benchmarks,
including having one of the lowest levels of spend per capita;
the impact of ongoing funding shortfalls on the Council's ability to
deliver services; and
key recommendations and the critical next steps required to address
the funding imbalance.
It was agreed at this meeting that Minister Sean Canney TD would arrange a
meeting with the DHLGH Minister James Browne TD, to further progress
these matters. We await confirmation of this meeting date.
In addition, the Chief Executive followed up the above correspondence
through a telephone engagement with the Assistant Secretary in the DHLGH.
Page 20 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Cllr. Hoade, Leas Cathaoirleach confirmed that following the meeting held on 30th
March, Minister Canney undertook to seek a meeting with the Minister James
Browne T D. The Director of Finance provided a clear document at the meeting,
stating the Council's asks.
Cllr. Cunniffe spoke on his motion. Non-government Councillors are not privy to the
processes that take place. There has been no update since the meeting of 30th
March. We need to know the current situation to be able to lobby our TDs. Copies of
the presentation were not circulated to the Elected Members following the meeting.
Cllrs. Donohue, D. Connolly & Geraghty raised the following points and
queries:
Dissatisfaction was expressed at the lack of update following the meeting.
The presentation given at the meeting has not been circulated to the Elected
Members.
No further updates have been provided on Dunguaire Castle.
There is a huge funding deficit in Galway County Council, resources are
needed to deliver services. Galway TDs need to bring this message back to
government.
The recent comments from the previous Taoiseach regarding rural Ireland,
are out of touch with reality.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Stated that the meeting with the Oireachtas Members as requested by the
Elected Members, took place on the 30th March.
Outlined that he and Director Mr. Owens met with Minister Burke and have
provided him with the detail of the project at Dunguarie Castle, the ask of
Galway County Council and the cost estimate for capital works.
The Executive will continue its efforts until funding is secured.
Page 21 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Indicated that Galway County Council are awaiting a funding announcement
from Fåilte Ireland for capital tourism projects, to which it is our intention to
apply.
On a general Council funding point a larger amount from the Equalisation
Fund and Local Property Tax (LPT) is required.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
At the meeting the Minister committed to part funding the Dunguaire project
through Failte Ireland funding.
A meeting is due to be held with National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS)
in mid-May.
Also, a date in May is to be agreed for a meeting with the Office of Public
Works (OPW).
Following these meetings, we will revert to the Minister on the remaining
funding required of the overall €5m cost.
ITEM 15. QUESTION Cllr. Reddington
Cllr. Reddington submitted the following question to the meeting:
"In regards to the septic tank grant there are three criteria to qualify
DWWTS grant under the National Inspection
DWWTS grant in Prioritised Areas for Action
DWWTS grant in High Status objective Catchment Area
4729
If a householder does not qualify under the above criteria would an engineers report
which will state that the septic tank is not operating correctly suffice to qualify for the
grant"?
The following reply issued:
Grants for Domestic Waste Water Treatment systems (NIWTS) are available under
three separate schemes as outlined below:
Page 22 of 32
1.
2.
3.
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
DWWTS grant under the National Inspection plan (NIP) — Under the
National Inspection Plan 2022—2026, septic tanks are selected based on a
risk-based approach prioritizing areas where systems pose the highest threat
to public health or environmental water quality. 105 random septic tank
inspections are carried out every year in agreed priority areas by Galway
County Council inspectors. It is only when an inspection has been carried out
that a grant for septic tank upgrades can be applied for.
DWWTS grant in a Prioritised Area for Action - In order to be eligible for
this grant, the DWWTS serving a house must be situated in a Prioritised Area
for Action in accordance with the River Basin Management Plan for Ireland
2022-2027, and the applicant must have received a letter from the Local
Authority Waters Programme Office (LAWPRO) on behalf of the local
authority, confirming eligibility to apply for a grant.
DWWTS grant in a High-Status Objective Catchment Area - In order to be
eligible for this grant, the DWM/TS serving a house must be situated in a High-
Status Objective Catchment Area in accordance with the River Basin
Management Plan for Ireland 2022-2027, and the applicant must have
received a letter from the local authority confirming eligibility to apply. The link
to the maps identifying the High Status Objective Catchment area is set out
below.
At present there is no other grant scheme open to the public for DWWTS even with
the benefit of an Engineers report confirming that the septic tank is not operating
correctly.
High Status Objective Catchment Areas
Cllrs. Reddington, Kelly, McHugh Ryan, Geraghty, Mannion, Grealish, L.
Harney, Regan, Donohue & Thomas raised the following points and queries:
Page 23 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
The eligibility criteria for this grant are overly prescriptive, which may be
misleading to the public.
It was asked if our Oireachtas Members are making representations on this
matter.
Clarity on the qualifying criteria was requested.
A question was raised as to why condemned septic tanks did not qualify on
environmental grounds.
It was asked that a motion be sent to the Department, requesting that all
septic tanks be eligible for grant funding.
The Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) have written to Minister O'Sullivan on
this matter. The response received stated that the scheme is being reviewed.
The grant is currently available in targeted areas to ensure highest impact.
Amending the criteria to allow for the acceptance of engineers' reports would
be a more realistic approach than attempting to include every septic tank.
If every home was eligible under this scheme, would holiday homes be
included.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
• This topic is raised at SPC regularly.
• Regulations are in place to protect the environment.
• She will correspond with the department, as per the Members request.
The following motion was PROPOSED by Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Lee:
'l propose that Galway County Council write to the Department to ensure all County
Galway is included to qualify for grants re domestic wastewater treatment. '
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Lee the above motion was
AGREED.
Page 24 of 32
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
4730
Cllr. Mairtin Lee submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
"Tå mé ag moladh go gcuiffidh Comhairle Contae na Gaillimhe litir ag an tÜdarås
Nåisiünta lompair ag iarraidh orthü seirbhisi breise a chuir ar seirbhis bus an 424 go
håirithe ag an am is gnöthai a bhionn siad. Ba cheart dhoibh freisin an seirbhis bus
cathratach a chuir amach chomh fada le Bearna, chun cuid don ualach a thögail On
seirbhis an 424.
I am proposing that Galway County Council send a letter to the National Transport
Authority requesting that they add additional services to the 424 service, particularly
at the busiest times. They should also extend the city bus service as far as Bearna,
to take some of the pressure off the 424 service".
Cllrs./ Comh Lee, Keane & O Curraoin raised the following points and queries:
The 424 bus is overcrowded. Commuters are being left on the side of the
road.
There needs to be an increase in both frequency and capacity on the route
especially early morning and evenings.
The above motion was PROPOSED by Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Keane and
AGREED.
ITEM 17. NOTICE OF MOTION
4731
Cllr. Thomas Welby submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
"This Council agrees that the Comprehensive Economic Trade Agreement (CETA)
providing additional rights to multinational corporations to sue the state outside of
ordinary legal systems we currently have will undermine EU social, health and
environmental standards. This Council acknowledges that many of the trade
Page 25 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
elements are already in place and does not need the addition of corporations being
able to sue the Irish government through the Investor Coun System (ICS) when any
new laws affect their profits. This council stands against the Investor Court System
(ICS) and calls this constituency a CETA-Free Zone.
This Council resolves to write to the Minister for Trade, the Minister for Local
government and the Taoiseach to outline this position. It further resolves to publicise
the council's concerns about CETA and to circulate this motion with other Councils
as correspondence for consideration".
This item was deferred until the May plenary meeting.
ITEM NO. 18 CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
4732
The Leas Cathaoirieach reminded the Members that the Cathaoirleach Awards are
being held on 8th May at 18:30 in the Raheen Woods Hotel in Athenry.
Also, that the Cathaoirleach Ball in support of Epilepsy Ireland and Breast Cancer
Research is being held on 31st May at 19:00 in the Raheen Woods Hotel in Athenry.
She congratulated everyone involved in the recent designation of Joyce County and
Western Lakes as a UNESCO Global Geopark.
Cllr Feeney highlighted that former Councillor Seån Ö Tuairisg was heavily involved
in this project and it was agreed that a letter should be sent to him thanking him for
his work in achieving the designation.
The following motion was PROPOSED by Cllr. Thomas SECONDED by Cllr.
Cunniffe:
'That Galway County Council writes to the Minister for Public Expenditure,
Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation, Jack Chambers TD
requesting that the new hospital buildings planned for Galway University Hospital —
whose development and control plan DCP, has been approved and is ready to be
delivered — be designated as Critical Infrastructure (or otherwise given an equivalent
Page 26 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
strategic priority status) to enable an accelerated pathway for approval, funding
allocation, procurement and delivery, in order to address urgent and growing
healthcare capacity needs across Galway and the wider West/North-West region.
I would also request that this motion be forwarded to all other Local Authorities in the
wider West/North-West region to ask that they also submit this motion or a similar
one. '
The Leas Cathaoirleach outlined as per Standing Orders that it was necessary for a
majority of the Members present to approve the taking of the motion and that it was
necessary for the passing of the motion that not less than 20 Members vote in
favour, if required.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. O Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty it was
AGREED by the Elected Members to approve the taking of the above motion.
Cllrs. Thomas, Keane & Feeney raised the following points and queries:
Designating the new hospital plans as Critical Infrastructure will speed up the
delivery of the new hospital buildings.
Concern was raised as to whether the implementation of this motion might
have unforeseen implications.
It was queried whether a change in the project's status would result in it
moving into a different process.
It was asked from where this request originated from.
It was responded that the request was received from a member of the hospital
board.
It was pointed out that the request being made is to include the project on a
list, before the associated Bill has been passed.
It was asked what the difference between Strategic Infrastructure and Critical
Infrastructure is.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• The Infrastructure Bill is currently before the House of the Oireachtas. The
assigned Task Force is identifying means for the State to move critical
Page 27 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
infrastructure through the planning system as quickly as possible. Exact
details have not yet been released. Secondary legislation will be agreed by
cabinet and Government.
Cllrs. Thomas, Keane, Feeney, Geraghty, Keane, & Walsh raised the following
points and queries:
It was suggested that the words lat the appropriate time' be inserted into the
motion.
The motion is to ensure that the proposed works at Galway University
Hospital are placed at the top of the list.
Legislation shoutd be enacted before this is discussed.
By sending this motion, the Council are highlighting the existing need in
advance of the Bill being enacted.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Suggested that 'when the legislation is enacted' be inserted into the motion.
The motion was amended as follows:
(When the legislation is enacted that Galway County Council writes to the Minister for
Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and Digitalisation, Jack
Chambers TD requesting that the new hospital buildings planned for Galway
University Hospital — whose development and control plan DCP, has been approved
and is ready to be delivered — be designated as Critical Infrastructure (or otherwise
given an equivalent strategic priority status) to enable an accelerated pathway for
approval, funding allocation, procurement and delivery, in order to address urgent
and growing healthcare capacity needs across Galway and the wider West/North-
West region.
I would also request that this motion be forwarded to all other Local Authorities in the
wider West/North-West region to ask that they also submit this motion or a similar
one, '
Page 28 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
The amended motion was PROPOSED by Cllr. Thomas SECONDED by Cllr.
Cunniffe and AGREED.
Cllrs./ Comh. Cunniffe, Thomas, Donoghue, Leainde, Keane, Regan, O
Curraoin, M. Connolly, McHugh Ryan, Geraghty & L. Harney raised the
following points and queries:
•
A meeting was held recently regarding the future of the Galway Airport Site.
The site in question is public land and should not be sold. There must be a
public dividend derived from the site.
A discussion on the future of the site should be had before Expressions of
Interest (EOI) are sought.
Monies can be gained from companies based on the site paying rent. The
potential long term financial gain should not be overlooked.
The Galway Flying Club are left in limbo every year regarding the renewal of
their lease.
The decision on the future of the site will lie with the Elected Members
following the completion of the EOI process.
Preference to keep the site as a working airport was expressed.
The timeline of the EOI process was asked.
The matter was discussed at CPG, it was not bought before the Members for
decision.
The contents of the tender documents were queried.
The site would be suitable for small indigenous companies.
It was asked how much the current tenants are paying in rent.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
6 Expressions of Interests (EOIs) have been received and are currently being
evaluated by an expert board. It is a requirement that the site be offered to
semi state sector before being offered to the private sector.
The report should be completed by end of May.
No EOIs have been received from the health sector or the flying club.
Page 29 of 32
Cllrs.
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
A requirement was set out in the County Development Plan (CDP) for a
Masterplan to be prepared for the site in conjunction with relevant
stakeholders.
The Members vision is set out in the County Development Plan and the
Executive will ensure that their vision is followed through with.
The EOI process is currently at a commercially sensitive stage.
The final decision will be made by the Elected Members of both City and
County Councils.
The Members will be advised once the final report is received. A report will be
provided to the Members by the CE and the Members will make the final
decision.
Cunniffe & Regan raised the following points and queries:
There must be a community dividend included in the plans for the site.
The site should not be sold.
Towns are in need of playing pitches, this land can provide them.
Cllr. Hoade, Leas Cathaoirleach said that the item will be back in the chamber at
either the May or June plenary meeting, a discussion can take place then. It is
important to complete the process and then examine the proposal that is put forward.
Cllr. Reddington, Thomas & Hoade raised the following points and queries:
Made enquiries on the works currently taking place at Parkmore Hill on the
N84 Headford Road. Concern was raised that a serious accident may occur
as a result.
It was asked of the Elected Members that they share 'HopeSpace'
correspondence on their social media.
'HopeSpace' are a fantastic service and their work should be promoted.
Page 30 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
Explained that these road works are being undertaken by Galway County
Council's Project Office. He confirmed that 2 lanes, one left and one right will
be retained. The hours of work have been amended. If there are any further
queries, he invited them to be directed to himself.
Cllrs. I Comh. Regan, Finnerty, Kelly, O Curraoin raised the following points
and queries:
• Concern was raised that the Bishop of Clonfert and the Diocese of Galway,
Kilmacduagh and Kilfenora, is not permitting remains be reposed in Churches
of his diocese, while it is permitted in others.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Advised that this request is outside the remit of the Local Authority.
ITEM NO. 19 VOTES OF SYMPATHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS
A resolution of sympathy was extended to the following:
Peter Hoey, Ballylee, Peterswell, Co. Galway
Maria McNamee, Ballylin West, Craughwell, Co. Galway
Gerard Hall, Ballyboy, Gort, Co. Galway
4733
The Cannon Family, C/O Cannons, Masonbrook, Loughrea, Co. Galway
The Cotter Family, Danesfort Drive, Loughrea, Co. Galway
The Casey Family, Coscorrig View, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Micheål Moloney & Family, Derrybrien, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Margaret Whelan, Dalystown, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Tony McDonnell & Family, Moore Street, Loughrea, Co. Galway
The family of Mattie Cormican, Lakeview, Claregalway, Co. Galway
The Lenihan Family, Lakeview, Claregalway, Co. Galway
Page 31 of 32
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 27th April 2026.
Måirtin Bheartla Choilm Rua Ö Flatharta, An Gleann Mör, An Cheathrua Rua,
Co. na Gaillimhe
Congratulations were extended to the following:
• Corofin Set Dancers: All Ireland Senior Scor Champion Set Dancers
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
Page 32 of 32