COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
Minutes of Housing SPC Meeting held on Thursday, 19th February 2026 in the
Council Chamber, Galway County Council at 11.00 a.m.
I Léthair:-
Bail':
Oifigigh:
Leithscéal
Michael Maher (Chairperson)
Cllr.
Cllr.
Eileen Mannion
Shaun Cunniffe
Cllr.
Jimmy McClearn
Cllr.
Declan Kelly
Cllr.
Cllr.
Peter Keaveney
Cllr. Gerry Finnerty
Mr. Seamus Duffy
Ms. Helen Jennings
Ms. Rachel Stewart
Mr. Keon Senior Social Worker, Housing
Mr. Flood, Senior Engineer, Housing
Mr. Gerard Scully, Senior Executive Officer, Housing
Mr. Alan Brogan, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing Capital
Ms. Nuala Heffernan, Administration Officer, Housing
Ms. Angela Spellman, Administration Officer, Housing
Ms. Ciara McDonagh, Architect, Housing Capital
Mr. Kevin Gavin, Senior Executive Engineer Housing Capital
Mr. Morris Mafunga, Executive Engineer, Housing Capital
Mr. Brendan Kelly, Assistant Staff Officer, Housing
Mr. Damien Mitchell Director of Service, Housing
Ms. Karen O'Donnell, Senior Executive Officer, Housing
1
1.
Minutes of the meeting of the 18th December 2025
The minutes of the Housing SPC meeting held on the 18th of December 2025 were
proposed by Cllr. Eileen Manion and seconded by Cllr. Declan Kelly and agreed.
Matters Arising
None.
2.
Housing Delivery Action Plan — Work program for 2026
Mr. Flood provided the members with a detailed presentation update on the Housing
Delivery Action Plan. The following topics were discussed in detail.
Housing Delivery 2025
19 LA Build
o
34 Part V
o
0 113 Advance Purchase (TurnKey)
0 57 AHB of which 14 were the first Cost Rental Affordable Units delivered
in Galway County
Housing Delivery 2026
0 56 LA Build
0 102 Part V of which 3 were the first Part V Affordable Units delivered in
Galway County
0 143 Advance Purchase (TurnKey)
0 70 AHB of which 14 were Cost Rental Affordable Units
Westport Road, Clifden (27 Turnkey & 3 Part V) — Final Phase in March 2026
Kilcummin Field, Oughterard (20 Turnkey & 2 Part V) — Completion in October
2026
Tuber Na Luarcha, Bearna (40 Turnkey) — Completion in May 2026
Cosmona, Loughrea (56 Units — Mixed Tenure) — Completion in March 2027
Drom Na Gaoithe, Claregalway (88 Units — Mixed Tenure) — Completion in March
2027
Housing Delivery
Completed - Residential Zoned Land Review
Housing Infrastructure Investment Fund (HIIF)
1st call closing date 27th of January 2026.
o
2
•
Proposed submissions include funds for Irish Water Pumping
stations, junction upgrades, footpaths, Playgrounds, cycle lanes
and active travel schemes.
It is hoped that these proposed upgrades would make zoned
residential lands accessible for future housing delivery.
• Housing Delivery Programme 2025 to 2030 Delivering homes, Building
Communities
The Chairperson thanked Mr. Flood for his presentation, and he asked him to outline
how many applications there were for the affordable units at Comona, Loughrea and he
asked if there could be more affordable units provided at this development.
In reply, Mr. Flood confirmed that GCC has received planning permission for 56 units at
the mixed tenure Housing Development at Cosmona, Loughrea and the results of the
recent affordable survey showed that over 200 individuals have expressed an interest in
acquiring an affordable unit in Loughrea, with 1, 2 and 3 bed units being the most in
demand. Mr. Flood outlined that original proposed split of 35 Affordable and 21 Social
units at Cosmona is currently being reviewed and it is likely that the number of
affordable units will be increased to meet the demand. He said that GCC owns land to
the back of the Cosmona site and this has the potential to provide an additional 18 units
on the site with the majority being delivered as affordable units. Mr. Flood outlined that
GCC is in the process of tendering for auctioneering services to sell the Cosmona units.
He said that GCC is trying to mirror what is occurring on private estates, where 80% is
delivered as affordable and 20% is delivered for social housing.
Cllr. Mannion thanked Mr. Flood for his update presentation, and she thanked him and
his team for the recent delivery of two state-of-the-art housing developments in Clifden
which have resulted in many young famities moving into Clifden. She asked if there are
any plans to develop a small social housing scheme in Ballyconneely, like the successful
Clufd development in Letterfrack and Roundstone, as there is no social housing in
Ballyconneely. She asked if there are any plans to deliver an affordable scheme in
Clifden. Cllr. Mannion also asked if there were any Part V social housing units coming
down the pipeline in Moycullen as there are several private housing developments
under construction.
In reply, Mr. Flood said that the provision of social and affordable housing units in
Connemara is restricted due to the infrastructural issues in that area, as there are only
five areas of Connemara that are currently serviced by a wastewater treatment plant.
He outlined that a new national housing plan, Delivering Homes, Building Communities
2025-30 does allow for the provision of Development Provided Infrastructure (or DP').
However, the details and funding for these DPI'S have not yet been published and GCC
waits this information before proceeding with any smaller housing schemes in the
Connemara area. Mr. Flood said that the current Part V Planning Permissions granted in
Moycullen are existing Planning Permissions and as such the new 20% requirement does
not apply. He said that if any new planning permissions are submitted and granted in
3
the coming months, then Housing will look at providing affordable units on those
schemes.
Cllr. Shaun Cunniffe asked if the proposed social housing units at Farrannamartin, Tuam
are included in housing delivery numbers for 2026 or 2027. He also asked if there were
any proposed Affordable schemes planned for Tuam, and he asked for more details on
the proposed infrastructure funding submissions mentioned in Mr. Flood's presentation.
In reply, Mr. Flood stated that the Farrannamartin units are expected to be delivered in
2027 and the Tender assessment is currently ongoing. He outlined that GCC is working
on a design team plan for the provision of a mixed tenure scheme (Social & Affordable)
of approximately 120 units at Sun St. Tuam. These would include mostly 2 and 3 bed
affordable units and some OAP and Persons with Disability units also. In terms of
Planning, Mr. Flood said that he is hopeful that Sun Street will be a Part 8 submission,
however it may need to be a Part IO submission based on the findings of an Ecological
Report for the scheme.
In terms of the infrastructural requirements, he outlined that Housing has reviewed and
assessed all the Residential Zoned lands that GCC has access to and Housing are
currently seeking funding under the Housing Infrastructural Funding (HIFF) scheme. Mr.
Flood stated that to apply and qualify for HIFF funding, the local authority must own the
land that the funds are being sought for and as such this somewhat limits the type and
location of infrastructural funding applications that can be applied for by Galway County
Council. In reply to a follow query from Cllr. Cunniffe, Mr. Flood clarified that the first
call for funding from the HIFF only permits Local Authorities and the Land Development
Agency to submit funding applications and it is not currently open to private developers
to seek funding. He outlined that it is a new funding mechanism open to Local
Authorities and there may be a second call for additional funding applications that may
be open to private developers.
Ms. Stewart asked if Galway County Council could put forward a suggestion to advance
the second call for HIFF funding to prevent any delay in its roll out in quarter 2 of 2026.
As a representative of Galway Chamber of Commerce and Galway Businesses, she
outlined that members are reporting a severe lack of private housing stock available to
people who earn less than €65,000 per annum and these companies and Organisations
are finding it increasingly difficult to attract both staff and Foreign Direct Investment to
Galway. She stated that this housing deficit is causing great concern and preventing
future business plans.
In reply to Ms. Stewart, Mr. Flood said that the HIFF does not only apply to Residential
Zoned lands owned by GCC, for example GCC can also apply for funding to upgrade
roads like the Athenry North Ring Road, and this funding would also help open adjacent
lands for private development.
Cllr. Mannion echoed Ms. Stewads comments regarding the lack of available
affordable housing units across Galway and particularly in Clifden. She stated that the
proposed variations to the County Development Plan is to be discussed at next Mondays
4
Plenary Council meeting, whereby Phase 2 lands can now be considered as Phase 1 land
for development. She outlined that this change could help to deliver an additional 7,500
housing units across the county.
Cllr. Declan Kelly sought clarity on a social media announcement from a member of the
Oireachtas that stated that all the units at the proposed development at St. Jospeh's
Road, Portumna were to be delivered entirely as affordable.
In reply, Mr. Flood said that there are two proposed Housing developments in Portumna
at St. Bridget's Road and St. Joseph's Road. He outlined that St. Bridget's Road will go to
tender in March 2026 and the tender assessment for St. Joseph's Road will take place
tomorrow morning. He stated that the findings from the Affordable Housing Survey for
Portumna were quiet positive and Housing are looking at delivering affordable units as
part of the St. Joseph's Road delivery.
In response to a follow up query from Cllr. McClearn regarding the proportion of Social
& Affordable units at St. Joseph's Road Portumna, Mr. Flood clarified that the scheme
will be a mixed tenure delivery of both social and affordable units. He outlined that the
above-mentioned Tender Assessment would determine the viability and proportion
ratio of Affordable to Social make-up on the proposed development.
On behalf of himself and Cllr. McClearn, Cllr. Declan Kelly thanked Mr. Flood for his
clarification regarding the proportion of proposed affordable and social units at St.
Joseph's Road, Portumna, and he stated that it is a very welcome development in the
town. He said that it is unhelpful when members of the Oireachtas put out incorrect
information regarding housing development, and he stated that he will be raising this
issue at the next Ptenary Council meeting.
In reply to a follow up Affordable query from The Chairperson, Mr. Flood said that there
is Social & Affordable demand in most urban locations and as such GCC is aiming to
deliver these developments as Mixed Tenure estates that include both affordable and
Social Housing units. He outlined that GCC are developing two 100% affordable schemes
in Athenry, and one of these is an extension to an existing LA Build Social Housing
scheme these are currently advertised as Part 8 Developments.
3.
Homeless Emergency Accommodation, Tuam — ATU Presentation
The chairperson invited Ms. Nuala Heffernan to give an introduction to the Committee
regarding the collaborative project between GCC's Homeless Services Section and the
fourth final year Architectural students from the Atlantic Technical University in Galway.
This project relates to the provision of short-to-medium-term accommodation support
to vulnerable homeless people who require additional support to address their long-
term housing needs. Ms. Heffernan acknowledged and commended each of students for
their enthusiastic commitment, effort and time that they gave to the project. Ms.
Heffernan personally thanked each student Siobhan Cusack, Armand Epitime, Olwia
5
Brzezinska and Rion Feeney, their lecturer Lynn McLoughlin and Celine Curtin, Head of
Department of Creative Arts for their interest and passion for the project. A 3-d model
of the proposal was displayed and Mr. Feeney made a presentation on behalf of the
students, which included details of the following:
CWR & Medium-Term Support Facility — Vicar St. Tuam
o Floor Plans
Zoning
• Color coding was used that evoked positive emotions in
both staff and residents
• Electrical & Lighting
• 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor electrical plans
o Concerts & Mood Boards Visualizations
•
Left. Reception Area
Reception
Accommodation
Treatment Room
Staff Room
Common Areas
Kitchen
Bathrooms
Garden
Left. Accommodation
Right: Treatment Room
Right. Garden Area
6
3D Visualisation
3D Drawings — Revit (Below)
•
Custom Bed
Laser Cut Model
3D Drawings — Sketch Up Renders (Below)
Specifications — including furnishings
•
•
Reception Area
Accommodation
Treatment Room
Staff -Room
Common Areas
Kitchen
Bathrooms
Garden
The Chairperson thanked Mr Feeney and his fellow students for their fantastic project and
presentation. He welcomed this collaborative initiative between GCC and ATU and
acknowledged the importance and need for a facility to provide much needed emergency
accommodation and treatment supports.
Cllr. Mannion thanked the students for their presentation and she agreed with the
Chairperson that it was a great initiative and suggested that it should be replicated
elsewhere to provide practical experience to the students. Cllr. Mannion inquired about
the course the students were enrolled in and how their experience of learning about
Homelessness would impact on their plans for the future.
In response, Ms Lynn O'Loughlin (Program Chair for the Interior Design Programme at
ATU) thanked the Chair, and everyone present for the warm welcome and opportunity
for her 4th year students to present to the committee. She outlined that the school was
delighted to take on the project with GCC and it allowed ATU to establish and build a
partnership with GCC. She said that the project had been an amazing learning experience
for the students and it has altowed them to practice their individual skill set in their final
year. Ms. Loughan said that these students will be the first to graduate from the Interior
Design course at ATU and both she and her teaching colleagues are delighted to have
established the partnership with GCC for the future.
Ms. Heffernan once again thanked the students for their hard work and commitment to
the project and she also expressed her gratitude to the Housing Capital Team who worked
very closely with both Homeless Services and the students.
Ms. Stewart said that the standard of work presented by the students was very impressive
and that she really enjoyed the colour pallets chosen for each of the rooms in the facility
and it showed that the students had thought deeply about their impact on the future
residents of the facility.
In response to a query from Mr. Dean, Ms O'Loughlin outlined that it is a four-year course
in which all students go on work experience in 3rd year whereby they learn to physically
draw their concepts before they move on to use Sketch-Up and Revit design software.
She outlined that the course is focused primarily on Interior Design, however there is a
lot of cross over with architectural concepts and design that will allow each student to
stand as freelance designers who can work alongside architects.
Mr Scully concurred with the previous speakers who praised the professionalism and high
quality and standard of the work completed by the students during the project. From a
tenancy sustainability point of view, he said that it is vitally important that Housing
Waiting List (HWL) clients who are leaving homeless services are prepared adequately to
accept and maintain a new tenancy in their forever home.
Cllr. Cunniffe said that he was so impressed by the standard of the presentation and work
carried out by the students and he complemented and congratulated both the Council
and the ATU for coming together to collaborate on this much needed project.
8
Ms. Heffernan encouraged all present to take a moment to view the models, drawings
and posters in relation to the project which are set up in the Chamber.
The Chairperson concluded by congratulating and thanking everyone involved in the
project and he said that every Municipal District will be looking to have such a facility in
their area to meet the challenge of homelessness.
4.
Update on Traveller Accommodation Program
Ms. Nuala gave a presentation update to the committee on Traveller Accommodation.
The following areas were discussed in detail:
Traveller Specific Accommodation (TSA)
0 17 Single Rural Properties in Co. Galway
0 60 houses in Traveller Specific Group Scheme Housing
0 17 single rural properties
0 16 halting site bays
Traveller Liaison Officer (TLO) role
o
o
o
o
o
o
A new TLO is due to start in February or March 2026
The Traveller Liaison Officer liaises with Travellers residing in Traveller
Specific Accommodation to facilitate Estate Management and
maintenance of Traveller Specific accommodation.
The TLO promotes awareness among Travellers as regards their housing
rights and responsibilities including their rights and responsibilities to
their neighbors and community.
The TLO encourages positive participation by all Travellers and promotes
democratic leadership.
The TLO engages with housing staff with regard to housing maintenance
and refurbishment projects.
The TLO, in conjunction with other housing staff, arranges fire safety
awareness training in halting site and encourages participation by
residents.
GCC has access to funding under the Dormant Accounts Fund
o
The Traveller Liaison Officer liaises with Travellers residing in Traveller
Specific Accommodation to facilitate Estate Management and
maintenance of Traveller Specific accommodation.
Funding has been used by Galway County Council for the following projects
since 2023
• Mediation training for 3 members of staff
• Landscaping of green area in Gortbride including provision of
seating and flowerbeds
• Painting of 3 houses in Sandymount, Killimor
• Commissioned fire safety video in relation to halting sites in
collaboration with Galway Fire Service
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 — 2029
9
Local Authority was required to prepare, adopt and implement their sixth
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 — 2029 by 31st December
2024.
The Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee advises on
the provision and management of accommodation for Travellers (Housing
(Traveller Accommodation) Act 1998).
The LTACC, following a consultation process, prepares, and after adoption
by the plenary Council, implements a 5-year rolling Accommodation
Programme to meet the existing and projected accommodation needs of
Travellers in their areas.
Houslng Scheme
Baliydæid, Rhenry
Cloon)yon
o
Planned Refurbishment works at GCCs Traveller Specific Accommodation
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 - 2029
22M '2
of Propertbes
Works
Current Status
6
1
2
Major Refurbishment due 21/0212026
Energy Upgrades commence —
2026
Constn.actlon of On-site expected
completion 2026
Major refurbishment inc
upgrade o completlon Q3 2027
To cornrtence in 2027
refurbishment
To commence In 2029.
Major reftrbishment.
Regeneratim of site.
Current & Planned Refurbishment works at GCC's Single Rural TSA properties
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 - 2029
Location
Mountbellew
' *enry
Athenry
Willianutown
Tuam
Headford
Number of properties
Works
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
MaÄ cefurEshrrÄ1t
refurbishrnent
R&ühment aM
aterwion
Refurbishment ard possible
exmsøn
af bwse
&rr.d Sbrm
Major refurbishment
Maj«
Refurbishsnent and possible
extetwbn
Current Status
2025
Design team to be
appointed 02 2026
2025
Submission to be made to
Dept QO 2026.
Desw• be 0
appohted Q22026
Q4 2028
Q4 2029
Q4 2027
Photographs of the progress of the projects which were currently ongoing were included
in the presentation.
The Chairperson thanked Ms. Heffernan for her detailed presentation on the Traveller
Accommodation Program, and he pointed to the importance of the refurbishment
programme which can transform a property and the lives of the tenants. He said it was
an ambitious programme over the next four years.
10
Cllr. Mannion thanked Ms. Heffernan for her presentation and for her overall work on
preventing homelessness with the traveler community.
5.
Any Other Business
Cllr. Eileen Mannion requested an update/comment on the recent changes to the
Housing Scheme of Allocations for applicants who require a 2 or 3 bed unit.
Cllr. Mannion also outlined that she attended a recent Domestic Abuse Seminar in
County Hall and it outlined the difficulties experienced by some victims that live in social
housing and there is only one name listed on the tenancy. She asked if this topic could
be addressed in some way at the next SPC.
In reply, Mr. Scully said that he would contact and discuss the Housing Scheme of
Allocations updated with Cllr. Mannion in the coming days.
Mr. Scully informed the committee that he has updated the current stats for LA and AHB
social housing units on Power Bl and he reminded all present that they can go on to the
council's website and interact and view these stats as they wish.
Ms. Stewart asked if GCC had any update on the East Galway Drainage Scheme as it has
the potential to unlock so much housing development.
In reply to Ms. Stewart, Mr. Flood said that he had no update on the Drainage Scheme,
however he stated that Irish Water is currently working on an investment programme.
Ms. Stewart stated that this investment programme is for 2030, and she outlined that
Galway Chamber had requested information from Irish Water regarding what current
Schemes were on track and no response was received. She stated that the proposed
second conductor site does not appear to be advancing, and it not clear when it will be
delivered and she outlined that it needed to be the key focus of infrastructural delivery.
The Chairperson invited Mr. Keon (Senior Social Worker — Housing) who was standing in
for Mr. Damien Mictchell, for any comments he may have. Mr. Keon informed the
committee that GCC's Housing Disability Strategy is up for review in 2026, while the
National Disability Strategy runs from 2022 to 2027. He said that the release of the
Governments disability strategy in 2022 meant that GCC had to make significant
alterations to GCC's strategy, and he asked the committee if it would be best to extend
the existing strategy until 2027 or should Housing press ahead with developing its own
strategy policy. He outlined that he wished to bring this important strategy to the
attention of the committee, and he recommended that it be included for discussion at
the next SPC.
The Chairperson confirmed that the next Housing SPC meeting is scheduled to take place
on the 21st of May 2026 at llam in the Council Chamber. He thanked all of the attendees
for their participation and he concluded the meeting.
11
Minutes Confirmed by Chairperson
telae C Okee
Cllr. Michael
er
Date:
12