Minutes of Annual Meeting held 19th June 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF ANNUAL MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at ÅRAS AN CHONTAE PROSPECT HILL
CATHAOIRLEACH:
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Oifigh:
Friday 19th June 2026 at 2.30 pm
Cllr David Collins
Cllr Andrew Reddington
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh./Cllr. S. Broderick, l. Canning, J.
Charity, D. Connolly, M. Connolly, S. Cunniffe,
T.Ö Curraoin, G. Donohue, P. Feeney, G.
Finnerty, T. Grealish, A. Harney,
L. Harney,
M. Hoade, C. Keane, P. Keaveney, D. Killilea,
P. Killilea, M. Maher,
E. Mannion, J. McClearn, S. McHugh Ryan, M.
McNamara, E.F. Parsons, M. Regan, N.
Thomas, O. Turner, and T. Welby.
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L.
Hanrahan, Director of Services, Mr. Michael
Owens, Director of Services, Mr. Uinsinn
Finn, Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Ms. K. O'Connor,
Director of Finance, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director
of Services, Ms. L.Keady, Meetings
Administrator, Ms.C.Connolly, Staff Officer,
Ms.T.Costello, Assistant Staff Officer.
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
Page 1 of 5
Minutes of Annual Meeting held 19th June 2026
Cathaoirleach Collins reflected on his term of office as both an honour and a memorable
experience. Among the many highlights of the year, he referenced the adoption of a
record budget and the significant progress achieved across the Council's service areas,
with particular emphasis on the delivery of affordable and social housing.
He was pleased to announce that the Cathaoirleach's Ball had raised €22,364.78, with
the proceeds to be shared between Epilepsy Ireland and the National Breast Cancer
Research Institute. He expressed his sincere appreciation to the outgoing Leas-
Chathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hoade, for her support and contribution throughout the year,
and presented her with flowers as a token of appreciation.
Cathaoirieach Collins thanked the Elected Members for their courtesy and cooperation
during his term and expressed his gratitude to the Chief Executive and Council staff for
their support, guidance and assistance. He also acknowledged the role of the media in
keeping the public informed on Council activities and extended special thanks to his
wife Lorraine, his family and friends for their support throughout the year.
The Members paid tribute to the outgoing Cathaoirleach, commending his fairness,
transparency, diligence and strong work ethic. He was widely praised for the exemplary
manner in which he represented Galway County Council and the county both at home
and abroad.
Cllr. Hoade was also congratulated on her year as Leas-Chathaoirleach. In response,
she paid tribute to the strong working relationship and teamwork that existed between
herself and the Cathaoirleach throughout their term of office. She noted that, through
their close collaboration and commitment to representing the Council, between them
they attended every event to which they were invited across the county during the year.
She also commended the Cathaoirleach for his outstanding service as First Citizen.
The Chief Executive, on behalf of himself, the Management Team and the staff of
Galway County Council, congratulated Cllr. Collins on his outstanding service as
Cathaoirleach and thanked him for the dedication and commitment he demonstrated
throughout his term. He acknowledged the excellent ambassadorial role Cllr. Collins
played in representing the county both at home and abroad. The Chief Executive also
thanked Cllr. Hoade for her valuable contribution and commitment during her term as
Leas-Chathaoirleach.
Page 2 of 5
Minutes of Annual Meeting held 19th June 2026
Cllr. Hoade reflected on her year as Leas-Chathaoirleach and the many events she
attended across the county. She stated that she was proud to support the Cathaoirleach
throughout the year and had greatly enjoyed the functions they attended together. Cllr.
Hoade also noted that the funds raised at the Cathaoirleach's Ball would make a
significant and meaningful difference to the two nominated charities.
ITEM NO.I ELECTION OF THE CATHAOIRLEACH OF THE COUNTY OF GALWAY
FOR YEAR 202612027
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Charity, the Members
AGREED to elect Cllr. Reddington Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway for year
2026/2027
Cllr. Reddington was vested with the Chain of Office and assumed the chair.
Cathaoirleach Reddington addressed the Chamber. He thanked the Members. He
thanked Cllrs. McClearn and Charity for nominating him for position of Cathaoirleach.
He acknowledged the work of outgoing Cathaoirleach Cllr. Collins as a fantastic first
citizen He thanked the Members for bestowing the responsibility and their trust in him,
and to his wife, Bernie, parents and family for their support. He undertook to serve the
people of Galway with compassion, enthusiasm, fairness and transparency. To afford
adequate time to the Members in the Chamber, to achieve consensus quickly and
efficiently. He confirmed his respect for the mandate from the constituents and will work
to achieve the Council's goals. He paid tribute to the work of the Chief Executive,
Directors and Staff of Galway County Council, emphasising the need to let the public
hear the good stories of the Council's work.
Priority areas for him in the coming year will be:
Strengthen relationships with Uisce Eireann, I-D.A and Enterprise Ireland
Support and drive Communities and Voluntary groups across the county
Work to increase funding required to deliver vital services.
Work with council to deliver more housing for all including affordable housing.
Page 3 of 5
Minutes of Annual Meeting held 19th June 2026
Important time for County Galway with the engagement of the EU Presidency,
the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, from July to December
2026
The Members offered their individual congratulations to the newly elected
Cathaoirleach, acknowledging it was a very special day for him and his family and
extended their best wishes to him for the year ahead.
ITEM NO.2 ELECTION OF THE LEAS-CHATHAOIRLEACH OF THE COUNTY OF
GALWAY FOR YEAR 202612027
on the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Hoade SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty, the Members
AGREED to elect Cllr. Regan as Leas-Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway for
2026/2027.
Cllr. Regan was vested with the Leas Chathaoirleach's Chain of Office.
The Cathaoirleach, Chief Executive and Members congratulated Cllr. Regan on his
election as Leas-Chathaoirleach. Members acknowledged his more than 20 years of
service as an Elected Member and paid tribute to his extensive experience in public life,
his diligence, and his strong commitment to serving the people of County Galway.
Cllr. Regan thanked his colleagues for their support in electing him to the role of Leas-
Chathaoirleach. He committed to working closely with the Cathaoirleach, fellow
Members, the Management Team and staff of Galway County Council to advance the
Council's priorities and deliver positive outcomes for the people and communities of
County Galway.
ITEM NO.3 FIXING A SCHEDULE OF DATES FOR COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The Schedule of Dates for Council Meetings as circulated prior to the meeting was
noted as follows:
22nd June 2026
Page 4 of 5
Minutes of Annual Meeting held 19th June 2026
20th July 2026
August 2026 — (no meeting as per standing orders)
28th September 2026
1 9th October 2026
23rd November 2026
14th December 2026
25th January 2027
22nd February 2027
22nd March 2027
26th April 2027
24th May 2027
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Mannion the Schedule of
Dates for Council Meetings was AGREED.
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
Page 5 of 5
