Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY
COUNCIL
Monday 16th February 2026 at 11.00 a.m.
CATHAOIRLEACH:
Baill:
Oifigh:
Apologies:
Cllr. David Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh./Cllr. , S, Broderick, I Canning, D. Connolly, M.
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. O Curraoin, G. Donohoe, P.
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty, T. Grealish, A.
Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade, C. Keane, P. Keaveney,
D. Kelly, D. Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Kinane, M. Leainde,
M. Lee, E. Mannion, J. McClearn, K. McHugh Farag,
S. McHugh Ryan, M. McNamara, Dr. E. Parsons, A.
Reddington, M. Regan, N. Thomas, T. Welby
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Mr. M. Owens, Director of
Services, Mr. U. Finn, Director of Services, Ms. V.
Loughnane, NDirector of Services, Mr. B. Corcoran,
AISenior Executive Planner, Ms. R. Wilson, Graduate
Planner, Ms. R. Dowd, Graduate Planner, Ms. J.
Brann, Meetings Administrator, Ms. A. Power, Senior
Staff Officer, Mr. S. Keady, Assistant Staff Officer
L. Hanrahan, Director of Services; Comh/Cltr. G. King, J.
Charity, P. Mac an Iomaire, O. Turner & S. Walsh
Cllr. D. Collins welcomed everyone to Meeting.
Votes of Sympathy
Cllr. M. Hoade wished to extend her sympathies to Cllr, Gerry King on the
bereavement of his sister Anne in New York.
Cllr. J. McClearn wished to express his sympathies with the family of the late Michael
O'Neill, who was a former member of Galway County Council from 1991-1999.
An Comh. T. O Curraoin wish to extend his sympathies to the Kearney Family on the
death of Patrick.
1
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
All Members wished to be associated with the expressions of sympathy.
On behalf of the staff Mr. L Conneally expressed his sympathies to Cllr King.
Cllr. M. Regan wished to highlight that the speakers were not working on their side
of the chamber, and it was something that he had raised previously.
Cathaoirleach D. Collins reminded the Members that they were here today for
Special Meeting to consider Chief Executive's (CE) Report on submissions received
on Variation No. 1 of the County Development Plan 2022-2028. He referred to
Workshop held on 06th February 2026 which was very beneficial for the Members.
He reminded the Elected Members of the provisions of Part 15 of the Local
Government Act and the Code of Conduct for Councillors that provides the Ethical
Framework for local government including provision for the disclosure of pecuniary
or other beneficial interests or conflicts of interest. It was noted that Councillors must
disclose at a meeting of the local authority any pecuniary or other beneficial interest
or conflict of interest (of which they have actual knowledge) they or a connected
person have in, or material to, any matter with which the local authority is concerned
in the discharge of its functions, and which comes before the meeting. The
Councillor must withdraw from the meeting after their disclosure and must not vote
or take part in any discussion or consideration of the matter or seek to in any other
aspect influence the decision making of the Council. Cllrs. A. Reddington and M.
Regan advised that they may have a Conflict of Interest during the proceedings and
would leave the meeting when the relevant submissions were being discussed. The
Members noted comments on Conflict of interest.
CE. L. Conneally expressed thanks to the Forward Planning team for work done to
date on Variation No. 1. He stated that the Members would be aware that housing
was the Government's no. 1 priority and as such a very clear indication and direction
was given that Local Governments must act to ensure that Development Plans have
identified sufficient land for housing development purposes. He noted that the
Variation process was instigated on receipt of Section 28 Guidelines and revised
Housing Growth requirements from the Department in July 2025 necessitating
amendment of County Development Plan to give effect to same. He noted that this
Variation was specifically focused on residential development only. He noted the
benefit of releasing strategic reserves of R2 lands in the county which were zoned
as part of initial County Development Plan process, which would allow for the
actioning of the Minister's July guidelines and direction.
Ms. Loughnane, Senior Planner advised the Members that they had received CE
Report on 19/01/2026 and referenced a workshop which was held on 06/02/2026.
Variation was on public display from 20/11/2025 — 23/12/2025. During that time, 46
no. valid submissions were received, and all the submissions were available to be
viewed online. She advised that there were 3 no. appendices appended to the CE
Report as follows:
2
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Appendix A — Settlement Capacity Audit
Appendix B — List of valid submissions
Appendix C — List of late submissions
To consider the Chief Executive's
Submissions received to Variation No.
County Development Plan 2022-2028
Report on the
1 of the Galway
4674
Ms. Loughnane advised that they would be going through the OPR Submission first.
GLW C20040 - OFFICE OF THE PLANNING REGULATOR
Pgs 5-7
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in these submissions and
read CE Response and Recommendation.
Summary
The Office of the Planning Regulator has provided comments on Proposed Variation
No. 1 to the Galway County Development Plan 2022 — 2028. The submission notes
that that Recommendations issued by the OPR relate to clear breaches of the
relevant legislative provisions, of the National or Regional policy framework and/or
of the policy of Government, as set out in the Ministerial Guidelines under Section
28. As such, planning authorities are requested to implement or address
recommendation(s) to ensure consistency with the relevant policy and legislative
provisions.
Overview
The submission outlines that Variation includes changes to the CDP following the
publication of the section 28 NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements
(2025) (Housing Growth Guidelines) and welcomes the approach to facilitate the
immediate development of Residential Phase 2 lands with regard to the Galway
Metropolitan Area, the Key Towns and tier 2 and tier 3 towns. The submission also
sets out that recommendations are made in relation to the Settlement Capacity Audit
(SCA) and to ensure residential standards in Garraun, in particular in the vicinity of
Oranmore Train Station are in accordance with the 2024 Guidelines. Two
recommendations are then made under the following themes.
1.
Implementation of the Housing Growth Requirements
The submission outlines that the approach taken by Galway County Council provides
sufficiently zoned land in line with policy and objectives 1 and 2 of the Housing
Growth Guidelines, while also ensuring a pipeline of land for development well
beyond the lifetime of the plan but raises concerns with the SCA and lack of details
regarding capacity of Residential Phase 2 lands in lower tiers and settlements. In
this regard, the Office recommends a focus on lands within the MASP or lands in
higher tier settlements which are accessible to public transport and active travel
3
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
modes, and which are without infrastructure or flood risk constraints, deliverable
during the lifetime of the plan.
The submission calls for provision of additional information including extent of zoned
lands (Residential Phase 1 and Phase 2); housing yield; infrastructure capacity and
constraints. The submission states that this will enable the prioritisation of
infrastructure investment and delivery for all settlements with Residential Phase 2
lands inclusive of Phase 2 lands in the five small growth towns and seven small
growth villages. While some of this information was indicated previously within the
CE's Report, it would benefit from being drawn together in a revised core strategy
table and SCA.
Concerns are also raised regarding anomalies in the SCA tables and issues with the
legend and colour shading for the SCA maps. These are further detailed in the
recommendation below.
Recommendation 1 • Core Strategy table and Settlement Capacity
Audit
Having regard to the statutory requirements for the preparation of a core
strategy and the implementation of the housing growth requirements, and in
particular to:
Section IO(2A) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended
(Act) for the preparation of the development plan core strategy;
the Development Plans, Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2022);
the NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements (2025) (Housing
Growth Guidelines), including policy objectives 1 and section 2.4 to
incorporate the objectives of the Housing Growth Guidelines into
development plans; and
NPO 101, 102 and 103 of the NPF to consider the serviceability of land
zoned for development,
ii.
iv.
the Planning Authority is recommended to:
revise the core strategy, table 2.9 of the Galway County Development
Plan 2022-2028 (County Development Plan) to ensure all statutory
requirements under section IO(2A) of the Act are included;
provide details of on the quantum (ha), housing yield (units), and
density of Residential Phase 2 lands for each settlement, including
the lower tier towns and villages;
review the Settlement Capacity Audit (SCA) tables to ensure the
legend and commentary is consistent and accurate in terms of
accessibility to water and wastewater network, all transport modes
and active travel network, road access and proximity to public
footpaths and necessary social infrastructure; and
review the Residential Phase 2 lands in the proposed Variation to
ensure the strategy prioritises serviced or readily serviceable lands in
areas of high demand such as the Metropolitan Area, Key Towns and
4
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
larger settlements within the Settlement Hierarchy of the County
Development Plan.
Planning Authority is advised to engage with all relevant prescribed
bodies to the review of the SCA, and also to review the SCA maps to provide
clarity to legend colour codes and shading applied to all the settlement maps.
Chief Executive Response
(i) Chapter 2 Core Strategy, Settlement Strategy and Housing Strategy of the County
Development Plan sets out the Core Strategy for the County. It is intrinsically linked
to the evidence presented within that chapter, therefore it is considered that the Core
Strategy should not be updated in isolation without a comprehensive review of the
Plan and growth strategy for the County. Furthermore, the absence of an updated
Regional Strategy copper fastens this opinion. However, to give effect to the Section
28 Housing Growth Requirements, the Housing Need and Demand Assessment
(HNDA) has been reviewed and updated. As such, the Minister's additional housing
growth figures have been incorporated into this document, while preserving the
authenticity of the Core Strategy. The revised housing figures are underpinned in the
HNDA. In addition, Residential Phase 2 lands have been effectively released across
all zoned settlement tiers in the County to provide a greater degree of choice and
flexibility for the provision of housing which is in keeping with the overall objective of
the Guidelines.
Table 2.9 in Chapter 2 of the CDP has been updated in the Housing Need and
Demand Assessment. This will be updated in Chapter 2 along with the Core Strategy
during the CDP statutory review.
(ii) A Table titled Residential Phase 2 lands has been included in the SCA
Appendix A.
(iii) The Settlement Capacity Audit now contains additional maps to show the
Residential Phase 1/Phase 2 zonings. In addition, clarity has been provided with
respect to the existing Local Transport Plans that are in place for a number of
settlements which have a particular emphasis on Active Travel and include priority
of measures to enhance pedestrian connectivity within each settlement. Other active
travel projects have been referenced in the SCA.
Additional detail has been provided from Uisce Éireann with respect to Water Supply
and Wastewater.
(iv) The SCA at Appendix A now highlights (with asterix) the most sequential
Residential Phase 2 zoned lands in each of the settlements identified within the
SCA (MASP; Key Towns; Area of Strategic Potential and Self-Sustaining Growth
Towns). This prioritises serviced or readily serviceable lands in the areas of high
demand.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
5
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
(ii) See Table of Residential Phase 2 lands in SCA at Appendix A. This
provides clarity to the SCA.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
Hoade and agreed by the Members.
See additional clarification to Settlement Capacity Audit at Appendix A.
(iii)
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. P. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
C. Keane and agreed by the Members.
(iv) See additional clarification to Settlement Capacity Audit at Appendix A.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. L. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
Residential density and integration of transport infrastructure at
2.
Garraun
The OPR welcomes the recognition of the important role of the Galway Metropolitan
Area and notes that the SCA identifies 21 hectares of Residential Phase 2 lands in
Garraun in proximity to Oranmore train station. The submission also welcomes the
revised insertions in table 15.1 but recommends specifying a higher density which
align with the Compact Settlements Guidelines and specifically referencing lands in
close proximity to the public transport node at Oranmore train station as outlined
below.
ecommen at on
inte ration at Garraun
eSi entia ensl y andlan usetransport
Having regard to the integration of transport orientated development
with land use planning, and in particular to:
NPO 10 of the NPF relating to compact and sequential patterns of growth;
NPO 97 of the NPF relating to the creation of new sustainable
communities at greenfield locations in association with major public
transport investment;
section 3.3.1 of the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact
Settlement, Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2024) (Compact
Settlements Guidelines); and
the National Development Plan 2021-2030 which identifies that funding
supports for the further development of commuter rail in Galway, with
significant track and station works proposed for Oranmore,
the Planning Authority is recommended to update the residential
densities specifying appropriate ranges based on Compact Settlements
6
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Guidelines at section 3.3.1 Cities and Metropolitan (MASP) areas and in
particular review the lands in close proximity to the Oranmore train station.
Chief Executive Response
Table 15.1 of the Proposed Variation commits to accord with relevant guidance. In
addition, it is stated that all development proposals shall be assessed having regard
to the above residential density table and the Guidelines which provide more
flexibility in relation to density ranges. Reference to the Urban Framework Plan
(UFP) lands at Garraun and Briarhill have now also been added to the table.
Chief Executive Recommendation
Update Table 15.1 to include (Text in blue)
MASP
Town
Centre/lnfill/Brownfield
Outer
Suburban/Greenfield
30 or Site
Specific
25 30 30 - 35
(at locations adjacent
to open rural
countryside) Higher
densities may be
facilitated in the Urban
Framework Plans e.g
at Garraun and
Briarhill
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. C. Keane, seconded by Cllr.
D. Killilea and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-16 - NATIONAL TRANSPORT AUTHORITY (NTA)
pg 9
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Local Transport Plans and Settlement Capacity Audit
The submission references the Local Transport Plans for Ballinasloe, Tuam,
Loughrea, Athenry and Gort which the NTA worked in conjunction with Galway
County Council during the LAP making process. It notes that the L TPs have informed
the LAPS for the towns setting out a framework for transport measures across all
modes and supporting the integration of land use and transport.
The submission then refers to RPO 6.2.8 of the RSES which states that policies,
objectives and measures which emerge from L TPs shall be incorporated into
Development Plans/LAPs. Submission also references the NPF Implementation
Housing Growth Requirements and to Section 2.4 Tiering and Phasing of Lands
which state:
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Planning Authorities should prepare an SCA in order to identify zoned
serviced/serviceable lands and to highlight infrastructural requirements and
Undertake an SCA to identify zoned serviced/serviceable lands with
residential development potential in all relevant settlements, specifying
enabling infrastructure, for example wastewater network or treatment
infrastructure, energy infrastructure, roads or public transport capacity and in
the case of enabling social infrastructure, schools provision and community
facilities.
The submission notes that the Proposed Variation includes an updated SCA. The
NTA is of the view that the SCA should be amended and strengthened to more
closely reflect the requirements identified which look to highlight infrastructural
requirements and to specify enabling infrastructure for transport required to service
lands. Regarding the settlements of Ballinasloe, Tuam, Loughrea, Athenry and Gort
this should refer to the proposed transport measures relevant to the subject sites as
defined in their LTP's/LAPs and should be broadened to cover all modes including
cycling and public transport requirements to ensure that any assessment of transport
requirements are not solely focused on providing access by car. NTA considers that
such an approach would align with RPO 6.2.8 of the RSES as set out by ensuring
that the L TP's adequately inform planning framework documents.
NTA Recommendations
The NTA recommend, in the interests of sustainable development, in order to avoid
car dependent development and, in order to align with RPO 6.2.8, that the
Settlement Capacity Audit be amended to more adequately 'highlight infrastructural
requirements' and 'specify 'enabling infrastructure' for transport as required under
the Section 28 Guidelines. This should consider all transport modes.
In the case of Ballinasloe, Tuam, Loughrea, Athenry and Gort, the Settlement
Capacity Audit for transport should be informed and led by the transport measures
set out in LTP's.
Lands at Garraun
In this section the submission generally approves of the approach the Local Authority
has taken to focus growth in the Metropolitan Area, Key Towns, Place of Strategic
Potential and Self-Sustaining Towns and within existing settlement boundaries.
Submission states that additional wording to policy objective GUFP 1 of the Garraun
UFP could be at odds and that further clarity should be provided as to whether
Residential Phase 2 lands at Garraun are intended for development during the
lifetime of the plan. It is also noted that the Residential Phase 2 lands at Garraun are
assessed as 'Orange' in the SCA against transport criteria. This implies that
transport infrastructure will be required to make these lands serviceable, however,
no requirements have been identified in the accompanying notes (note comments
above about updating SCA regarding infrastructural requirements/specify enabling
infrastructure). The NTA notes that these lands at Garraun are located around
Oranmore Train Station and the IA BusConnects service will operate along the
northern boundary of the lands. Access to these public transport services will be
critical to supporting sustainable development in this area.
The submission also notes that the draft Variation states 'Higher densities may be
facilitated in the Urban Framework Plans' which would apply to Garraun. It is the
view of the submission that this statement should be strengthened to state that
'higher densities will be encouraged and facilitated at Garraun'. The rationale behind
8
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
this change is Garraun's direct access to the rail network and the road network for
access to bus services.
NTA Recommendations
Further clarity should be provided as to whether the Residential Phase 2 lands
at Garraun are intended for development during the lifetime of the
Development Plan.
The Settlement Capacity Audit for lands at Garraun should be reviewed and
amended to adequately 'highlight infrastructural requirements' and 'specify
'enabling infrastructure' for transport as required under the Section 28
Guidelines. This should consider all transport modes.
Further consideration should be given to the potential to maximising densities
at Garraun. It is recommended that the following is included in Table 15.1:
'higher densities will be encouraged and facilitated at Garraun' given its direct
access to the rail network and the road network for access to bus services.
Chief Executive Response
The submission from the NTA is welcomed and its contents are noted.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation I(iii).
Noted.
The proposed wording of Policy Objective GUFP 1 inserted as part of the Proposed
Variation is considered sufficient and appropriate to satisfy the requirements of the
Section 28 Guidelines. The Variation seeks to permit appropriate development on
Residential Phase 2 lands in accordance with proper planning and sustainable
development.
The lands in question to the west of the Garraun UFP will require future road and
footpath upgrades.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
Recommendation I(iii).
The wording of the Proposed Variation in combination with wording in the existing
Garraun UFP is considered sufficient in this instance, where a degree of flexibility
will apply.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation I(iii).
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-23 - TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE IRELAND (Til)
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
TII in their submission reminds the Council of the issues pertaining where Residential
Phase 2 lands adjoin the national road network outside the 50 — 60 kph reduced
urban zones.
9
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission notes that direct access or intensification of direct access to a
national road conflict directly with the provisions of official policy included in the
Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines around national roads as well as the Galway
County Development Plan.
TII submitted previous observations on these sites during the preparation of the
County Development Plan/LocaI Area Plans. The submission states that the opinion
of TII remains the same as the previous submissions. The submission notes that
there are Residential Phase 1 lands and Residential Phase 2 lands which are
adjacent to the N59 National Road, to the northwest of Clifden at a location where
TII records indicate a 100kph speed limit applies. According to the submission,
access to the national road to the identified lands outside the 50-60kph urban speed
limit area conflicts directly with the Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines and Policy
Objectives of the County Development Plan.
The submission states that TII's position is that the zoning designations should be
reviewed to ensure the zoning designations and access requirements accord with
the provisions of official policy.
Chief Executive Response
The Chief Executive welcomes the submission of the TII and notes the concerns
raised with respect to the national road network outside where reduced urban speed
limits apply.
Til's comments with respect to the Clifden land use zoning map is noted, however,
changes to the land use zoning map do not form part of the proposed variation.
Nonetheless, the concerns highlighted are noted and the local authority will seek
further advice and guidance from TII at the appropriate juncture.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Welby, seconded by Cllr.
M. Hoade and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-42 - DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND YOUTH
Pg 12-14
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The Department of Education and Youth notes and considered the Proposed
Variation.
The submission outlines the context of future population trends and the potential of
the trends to impact on school place requirements. The submission refers to the
population growth in the current CDP and the increase from the 2016 to 2022 census
population in the Galway County area. The submission also refers to the Housing
Supply Targets proposed to be included in Section 2.3.8 of the CDP by way of the
10
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Proposed Variation. By applying an average household figure to the targets as
outlined the submission notes that a significant increase in population would result
in major additional requirements for school provision in County Galway by 2040.
The submission also notes that Variation emphasises directing growth to the Galway
MASP but as no settlement-level projections are provided, the Department will
reassess school place needs once detailed future growth targets are published. The
submission notes that due to significant growth projection, new school provision,
extensions or new schools, may be required, particularly in the metropolitan area
with a preference to extend existing facilities. The Department requests that land
buffers be protected around existing schools and that sites for future schools be
reserved and that further engagement between the Planning Authority and the
Department takes place when locations of future growth projection become
available.
The submission outlines key points in relation to new school sites, that schools
should be located centrally within new communities, on appropriately zoned land,
with enabling infrastructure (roads, utilities, active travel links) delivered in advance.
The submission notes that Table 15.1 has been amended, and that the variation
notes it is considered there is sufficient lands to meet the targets in the Core Strategy
and updated HNDA and Housing Strategy.
Additional Special Education Needs (SEN) provision will also be required. The
Department and National Council for Special Education (NCSE) continue to plan for
new special classes and special schools and may need further sites in Galway. The
Department seeks explicit support in the plan for SEN accommodation.
The submission stresses the importance of ongoing engagement with the Planning
Authority to ensure adequate land is zoned for future school provision, noting that
unforeseen events (e.g., Ukrainian crisis) may require reassessment of school place
provision.
Finally, the submission welcomes the continued engagement with the Planning
Authority to ensure sufficient land is zoned for the development of new and existing
schools.
Chief Executive Response
The submission from the Department of Education and Youth is noted and
welcomed.
The Housing Strategy and HNDA has been revised as part of this Variation. This
informs and underpins the housing requirements for County Galway. The renewed
emphasis of Residential Phase 2 lands is incorporated into the Variation to ensure
compliance with the Section 28 Guidelines. The Core Strategy remains in effect as
adopted in 2022,
It is noted that requirements for additional school places may lead to the need for
new schools or extensions to existing schools including SEN. Galway County
Council will work with the Department to support the delivery of additional
educational capacity. It is noted that Chapter 11 of the CDP contains Policy
Objectives and supporting narrative for educational facilities in the County.
11
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Any identification of lands for schools including land buffers could be addressed
through the CDP review. This has previously been raised by the Department of
Education and is noted by the Planning Authority.
It is considered that there are sufficient lands currently zoned in the County to
facilitate educational development. In addition, it should also be noted that
educational facilities are permitted in principle/open to consideration on multiple
zonings as per the County Development Plan.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. M. Hoade, seconded by Cllr.
M. Regan and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-26 - OFFICE OF PUBLIC WORKS (OPW)
Pg 14-15
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The OPW welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Variation No. 1
and note the submission specifically concerns flood risk management.
Map Review Programme
The submission outlines that in certain areas physical changes may have occurred
since the preparation of the flood maps under the National CFRAM Programme that
would affect the watercourse and floodplains, and hence the Flood Zones. The
submission notes new evidence may become available and the OPW reviews and
updates flood maps on an on-going basis. The submission notes flood maps are
currently under review in Tuam and Gort and request Galway County Council to note
that mapping in these areas may change.
The submission also notes a map review had been completed for Oranmore and
outlines the results from this review. The Submission requests the Council to review
the impact of any increase in flood extents on zonings and developments.
Oranmore
The submission notes the proposal to rezone lands from Open Space/Recreation &
Amenity to Town Centre. While these lands lie outside the updated CFRAM
present-day extents, they fall within the mid-range and high-end future flood
scenarios. Galway County Council are requested to outline how the potential risk will
be mitigated.
Climate Change
The submission outlines that a number of residential lands in Oranmore and
Garraun could be at potential risk of flooding in the mid-range and high-end future
scenarios. The submission notes that any changes to zonings in the future in areas
of flood risk, that an appropriate flood risk assessment is carried out and there is
appropriate justification for any decision as set out in the Guidelines.
12
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Chief Executive Response
The submission from the OPW is noted.
Map Review Programme
Noted. The lands in Oranmore subject to Variation No. 1 are demonstrated as being
situated within Flood Zone C.
Oranmore
The lands in Oranmore subject to Variation No. 1 are demonstrated as being situated
within Flood Zone C. Parts of the subject lands are identified as being at risk under
the mid-range and high-end future scenario flood extents. Climate change
considerations have been integrated into the existing provisions of the County
Development Plan 1 with which any project on these lands will need to continue to
demonstrate compliance with.
Climate Change
The points raised are noted.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
Ms. Loughnane made Members aware of the existing policy objectives in the CDP
regarding Flood Risk Management as per footnotes on Page 15 of the CE's Report.
Cllr. P. Feeney stated that there was a lack of clarification for Oranmore as per
OPW's submission. He enquired as to whether the map used in the Variation was
the most up-to-date map. In response, Ms. Loughnane advised that this was the
most up-to-date map and Planning Authority work off the most updated maps
available. Cllr. P. Feeney stated that for CDP review, the high-risk scenario mapping
for Oranmore was scary if taken at face-value, and that it was apparent that
Oranmore would be stifled for development were these high-range scenario maps
to be proven accurate. Cllr P Feeney enquired how this potential scenario would be
managed. In response, Ms. Loughnane advised that the OPW mapping was
concerning as Climate-Change has been embedded into the High and Medium
range scenario maps. Ms Loughnane advised that the OPW flooding data are used
to determine the mapping rectification as part of the Variation.
Concerning the CDP Review point, Ms Loughnane noted that only the most up-to-
date maps from the OPW were to be used during this process, with land zoned
accordingly.
Cllr. D. Geraghty opined that the OPW were blaming Climate Change and enquired
as to what the OPW were doing to prevent Climate Change. He opined that they
were not installing or considering preventative flood-methods but merely writing
reports and criticizing without doing anything tangible about it. He further added that
the onus was being squared onto Galway County Council when it is within their remit
and referred to the long-awaited flood-relief works to be installed by OPW in
13
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Ballinasloe. In response, Ms. Loughnane noted there were flood defense schemes
in place in parts of the county, including Dunkellin, Ballinasloe.
Cllr. J. McClearn enquired if land within Flood Zone C may be used as Open Space
for Residential Development. Ms. Loughnane advised that Flood Zone A and B is
zoned open space and, in most instances, could not be used as the only provision
of open space within a development.
An Comh. O'Curraoin opined that there were a lot of low-lying areas like Oranmore
in the county and the tides were coming in very high in a lot of places. He suggested
that barriers needed to be installed into flood risk areas to prevent future flooding
using the example of Spiddal as a place that actioned this flood-prevention effort.
He noted that the preparation for flooding needed to be improved upon and used
example of the Netherland's success with same. He further stated that he had read
recently that flood relief works at the Claddagh, Galway could not be installed until
at least 2030 due to roads issues. He opined that this was not acceptable, and that
when so many properties were at risk, there shouldn't be such trivial issues
preventing Elected Politicians from doing something about these issues in a timelier
manner.
Cllr. Donoghue queried as to the publication frequency of the OPW maps and
whether they were being updated in real-time following flood events. She opined
that in the past there was a huge amount of maintenance done on drainage systems
which unfortunately was not happening nowadays. Ms. Loughnane advised that
maps are updated at the OPW's discretion, as often as possible. She noted that
Claregalway's FRM had been finalized 18 months ago, while updating mapping was
being worked on for Gort and Loughrea currently. She noted that these Flood Maps
were constantly being monitored and updated, and that Galway County Council's
Flood Mapping Consultants always use the most updated mapping possible. In
response to Cllr. Donoghue's query, Ms. Loughnane advised that if there was a
significant flood event, it would take those and include them in the maps, and they
are updated constantly. Cllr. G. Donoghue sought to know whether these maps
assessed why flooding events occurred, or whether a lack of maintenance may be
a major factor for same. Ms. Loughnane advised that there were many types of
flooding, with a broader scope of variables of what may cause specific flood events.
She suggested that she consult with floodmaps.ie for further information.
Cllr. M. Regan queried the height the sea levels had to rise for the High-Risk maps
to be accurate. Ms. Loughnane noted that she was not aware of the details such as
sea level which featured in the modelling used by the OPW for the devisal of the
maps.
Cllr. D. Geraghty opined that OPW were doing nothing to prevent flooding 10 years
down the line and were not preparing to action any of the events that they are
predicting. Ms. Loughnane reiterated numerous flood relief schemes that were
constructed/under construction around the county, further reiterating that
environmental considerations were the factors constraining progress of these
schemes where applicable.
Cllr. C. Keane suggested that this important issue be addressed at another meeting.
14
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Cllr. M. Connolly referred to the first meeting held with OPW in relation to flooding in
Ballinasloe which took place over 11 years ago. He stated that Engineers had
advised what the problems were at the time and 11 years on, studies were still being
carried out. He acknowledged that there were flood barriers in place and queried
the length of time it takes to carry out such studies.
CE L Conneally noted that it was a good thing to have access to CFRAMs and
mapping of FRAS, as it allows forecasting of flood events. He noted that the
Executive's perspective was very strong in ensuring that mistakes of the past
regarding flooding do not occur again, ie.avoidance of development on flood plains.
He noted that flood schemes are a key priority for Galway County Council as well as
every local authority.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Geraghty, seconded by Cllr.
L. Harney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-24
BROCK MCCLURE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT CONSULTANTS ON BEHALF OF ÜDARAS NA
GAELTACHTA
Pg 16-24
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Comprehensive submission received which overall supports and welcomes the
proposed variation. The submission notes that Üdarås na Gaeltachta are a key
stakeholder of the development plan variation process and should be addressed
accordingly. The first section of the submission outlines the key points of the
submission, which will be summarized by topic. Overall, Üdarås welcome the
activation of R2 zoned lands.
Üdarås na Gaeltachta
This section outlines the background, goals and objectives of (Jdarås na Gaeltachta.
Üdarås na Gaeltachta supports the Irish Language in all 8 Gaeltacht regions,
including Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe, The submission outlines how Ödarås na
Gaeltachta aims to achieve this objective by funding and fostering a wide range of
enterprise development and job creation initiatives and by supporting strategic
language, cultural and community-based activities.
The Galway Gaeltacht Areas and Language Planning Areas
This section lists the 6 Gaeltacht Areas of Galway as outlined in the County
Development Plan, alongside the 9 Language Planning Areas (LPAs) (also
referenced as Limistéar Pleanéla Teanga in the submission) within County Galway
identified under the Gaeltacht Act 2012. In general terms, the primary goal of these
LPAs is to increase the use and vitality of the Irish language.
Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe and Challenges Faced
This section of the submission is to be read in conjunction with Appendix 1, outlines
the detailed population change analysis in the relevant LPAs.
Population Change — National & Gaeltacht Context
15
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Submission gives a brief overview of the population increase within the country as a
whole, the challenge of housing provision, noting it also has effects on the Gaeltacht.
The submission also notes the increase of Gaeilge speakers above the age of 3
within the Gaeltacht areas. This section of the submission outlines the population
changes and demographic changes within the overall 8 No. of Gaeltacht regions,
noting a general population increase.
Population Change in the Galway County Context
This section of the submission focuses on the demographic profile in Galway County
more specifically, analysing the language planning areas and county as a whole. It
notes a higher increase in population than the national average. In the LPAs the age
profile is generally older. Breaking down the demographics, the submission argues
that the trends in the overall age profile are intrinsically linked to outward migration
of the younger population within LPAs. This submission then examines the 5
settlements which are in the County Galway Gaeltacht, which include: Baile Chlåir;
Bearna; Maigh Cuilinn; An Spidéal and An Cheathrü Rua.
All of these settlements have had population increase, with the exception of An
Cheathrü Rua. The submission emphasises that as An Cheathrü Rua is located on
a peninsula; therefore, it is important that the unique geographical topography,
strategic position, and land area designated by the LPA should be carefully
considered in residential forecasts, infrastructure, and spatial planning efforts. The
submission then examines the age profile of the key Gaeltacht settlements, noticing
that these settlements have a much younger age profile. The submission states that
this is likely due to a lack of infrastructure and services in these areas compared to
the wider LPA areas. To avoid outward migration of this younger generation,
increased housing and improved services are now fundamental requirements.
Housing Provision Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe
The submission then turns its attention to the housing market within the Gaeltacht.
The submission notes that housing in these areas peaked between 2001 — 2010 and
has since lagged. The submission compares the amount of housing units built post
2016 with the population increase and concludes that population increase is
outpacing housing delivery. The submission notes the continuing decrease of daily
Gaeilge usage within the Gaeltacht. The submission argues that the overall difficulty
of housing nationally, and the unique issue of holiday homes within the Gaeltacht, is
putting undue pressure on young Gaeilge speakers to emigrate from Gaeilge
speaking locations, effecting the use of Gaeilge as the community language. The
submission notes that in the 20 Year Strategy for the Irish Language 2010—2030,
The Gaeltacht will be given special support as an Irish-speaking area, and this
support must be upheld through planning laws. The submission believes that the
issues of vacancy and dereliction in these areas requires significant attention. The
submission asserts that it is clear from the statistics analysed housing is a challenge
in the Gaeltacht, which is a critical challenge for Üdarås. The submission states that
it is a fundamental goal of Üdarås that all opportunities for the delivery of housing
are recognised and supported with adequate infrastructure and government support
(to include Üdarås). The release of R2 lands in the 5 key settlements is welcomed
but consideration should also be given to supporting lower tier settlement in the
delivery of housing along with adequate supports in tackling vacancy in the Gaeltacht
region.
Use of the Irish Language
16
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission states that the Galway Gaeltacht is strategically significant in terms
of both the number and concentration of Irish speakers within this area and the high
levels of use. This is further reinforced by the fact that the south Conamara Gaeltacht
is the largest unbroken stretch of Gaeltacht. This underlines the importance of
integrating Irish language concerns in planning policy within the county. Density of
speakers is very important to maintain Gaeilge as the primary language, which is
linked to spatial planning, the submission goes on to state that this relationship
should be carefully considered so that Gaeilge speakers have realistic options to
stay within the LPAs. The submission then examines Daily Gaeilge speaker
densities. The submission seeks that particular attention needs to be given to
maintaining communities as attractive and viable places for Irish speakers to
continue living, and to mitigating the pressures which impact outward migration.
Sustainable planning and housing provision is an essential tool in addressing
this. The overall competence and usage of Gaeilge in Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe
highlights the need for appropriate housing and services to support the language,
and to increase speaker density. The submission states this supports the language
nationally.
Relevant Planning Context
This section outlines in detail the extensive national, regional, and local policy
context for the Gaeltacht. Submission notes that the NPF recognises both the
importance of the Gaeltacht and Üdarås and aims to support both for the promotion
of the Irish language. The NPF also seeks to address the rural decline and
encouraging rural growth. This submission aims to support Gaeltacht na Gaillimhe
by supporting increased provision of housing in the area. The submission notes the
additional 50% headroom required in the Section 28 Guidelines and reiterates its
support for the opening of R2 land. The settlements within the Gaeltacht are noted.
When making comments on the Economic Engine map found within the
Development plan, the submission notes that none of the settlements identified are
recognised as 'Service Towns' under the Gaeltacht Act, and as such, there exists a
significant gap for spatial displacement. The importance of this map demonstrates
the growth potential for compact growth aligned with the core strategy. Without
investment in the smaller towns, the submission believes that unsustainable
commuting and development patterns will continue, which will be the detriment of
the Gaeltacht. The submission states that DM standards should be adapted to an
appropriate scale when applied to residential and economic development policies
within the Gaeltacht region, with particular consideration for appropriate spatial
planning frameworks. The submission states that the Development Plan
acknowledges the promotion and protection of the Irish Language in the Gaeltacht
and as such, any change to core policy must be considered in the context of the
Gaeltacht and not looked at in isolation. The submission concludes that
infrastructure must be prioritised to allow for sustainable forms of spatial
development for the Gaeltacht region.
Proposed Variation No. 1 — Galway County Council Development Plan 2022-
This section of the submission outlines the key considerations of Üdarås around the
proposed variation.
Infrastructure and Services
The submission notes the importance of the delivery of plan led infrastructure and
services for the development of the Gaeltacht. It reiterates the need for increased
housing due to the population increase and to prevent further outward migration to
17
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
protect the language. It emphasises the importance of developing the Gaeltacht. It
requests that the Variation must bring the delivery of associated infrastructure and
services to the fore alongside the release of R2 lands. The submission reiterates the
objectives on a National and Regional level to improve infrastructure and services,
however the submission notes that these objectives must be realised at local plan
level. This fact bares importances for the Gaeltacht to meet housing need. The
submission states that the variation must be coupled with deliverable local policy to
provide these services and infrastructure to the Gaeltacht. The submission mentions
the Accelerating Infrastructure Report and Action Plan and seeks that this report be
given weight in local policy. The submission is of the opinion that there is a
requirement for more focused policy related to infrastructure and services within the
Development Plan for the Gaeltacht. The submission argues that current policy
(such as GIED 3) is too generic. The submission requests that the Development
Plan and Proposed Variation therefore requires further consideration in terms of
additional policies and objectives to support increased infrastructure and services
delivery specific to the settlements releasing phase 2 zoned lands. In relation to the
SCA, the submission wishes to highlight that there has been no Settlement Capacity
Audit prepared for small growth towns and small growth villages. These areas are
also in need of increased and improved infrastructure and services to ensure the
delivery of housing within the Gaeltacht. Specifically, the lands in Maigh Cuilinn, An
Spidéal and An Cheathrü Rua require significant investment for the housing
increases forecasted for these settlements with the publication of the variation.
Gaeltacht Service Towns
This section of the submission defines of Gaeltacht Service Towns (GST) under the
Gaeltacht Act, and notes the 2 No. of GST in Galway:
Clifden
Galway City.
The submission notes the wide geographic area of the Galway Gaeltacht and notes
that there is only 2 GST's in this large area, causing lack of infrastructure and
services and unsustainable travel distances for residents in the middle of the
Gaeltacht. The submissions states that significant investment in roads and
infrastructure would encourage a more concentrated residential and economic
development alongside nodes/villages, potentially leading to settlements such as An
Cheathrü Rua becoming a GST in the future. Due to the lack of infrastructure in An
Cheathrü Rua, flexibility is suggested around housing provision. The submission
believes there is an opportunity to review the economic and core strategy for the
Gaeltacht. As Üdarås has an extensive property portfolio, a collaborative approach
with the LA to support the Gaeltacht is possible. For the submission, it is imperative
that consideration be given to an additional centrally located Gaeltacht Service town,
with the opening of R2 land providing an opportunity to achieve this.
Core Strategy and Density Standards
This section notes the Section 28 Guidelines and the resulting increased housing
targets. The submission also notes that Galway County Council has not published a
revised core strategy. The absence of a revised core strategy is concerning to the
submission, being of the opinion it is not currently clear how the additional baseline
housing allocation figures will be allocated per settlement/in the Gaeltacht. The
submission also notes the requirement for the identification of an additional 50%
headroom. There is a concern that without the core strategy, this 50% headroom
has not been provided for. The submission now urges the Local Authority to ensure
that all opportunities available to them to deliver on housing be considered at this
18
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
time, going on to state that where the opportunity arises, consideration should be
given to the release of housing in some of the key settlements of the county
hierarchy. The submission is of the opinion that it is imperative to achieve Policy and
Objectives 1 and 2 found within the Section 28 Guidelines to help alleviate the
challenges of the Gaeltacht. The submission notes specifically that the densities
within the variation are much lower than those set out in the Compact Settlement
Guidelines. While noting that there is no change to density allocations for small
growth towns and small growth villages, the submission notes that the density
ranges for Baile Chlåir and Bearna are subject to change within the outer
suburban/greenfield context. The submission is of the opinion that there is no
consistency between the Section 28 Ministerial Guidance and the changes to density
for the Metropolitan Settlements. The final Variation published must address this.
HNDA
The HNDA and new population figures is welcomed and supported by the
submission.
Gaeltacht Population Growth
In this section of the submission there is various tables outlining the speed of
population growth within the Gaeltacht. The submission reiterates the need for
increased and improved services and infrastructure within Gaeltacht. It is vital for
residential core strategy growth projection that a spatial distribution is reviewed in
the context of the Gaeltacht.
Renewed Focus on Residential Phase 2 Land
The submission states its support of Proposed Variation Section 2.3.12 and 2.4.4,
however there is a concern that the Gaeltacht areas must be readily available to
accommodate additional housing at a rate over and above the capacity of those
lands currently zoned for residential development in the area. The submission
reiterates the critical shortage of housing within the Gaeltacht as outlined in previous
sections, and that delivery needs to be realised on the ground. it is also important
for the submission to ensure this housing is built for competent Irish speakers and it
is critical that lands within the control of Üdarås be positively considered for
infrastructure upgrades to allow for residential development within this context.
The submission provides an overview of the 5 Gaeltacht settlements listed below:
Baile Chlåir
Bearna
Maigh Cuilinn
An Cheathrü Rua, agus
An Spidéal.
These paragraphs detail the demographics, housing make up, spatial context,
related LPA, and relevant policy. Each section seeks a final housing allocation by
way of a revised Core Table. The submission notes that lands owned to the north
of An Spidéal are under the ownership of Üdaräs. The submission again supports
the provision of infrastructure, specifically Objective SSGV3 to provide a road to
open up the residential lands for development.
Conclusion
The submission concludes by welcoming and supporting the Proposed Variation.
The increase to housing targets within the Gaeltacht specifically is considered a
19
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
positive that will also support Üdarås' main objective to preserve the Irish language
and ensure native speakers are housed in the Gaeltacht.
The submission concludes that the variation must secure the delivery of housing to
key rural settlements. While the submission believes that the current variation does
not comprehensively address all issues raised in this submission, Üdarås urges that
the preparation and recommendations of their report accurately reflect the relevant
provisions of official policy, including national and regional objectives pertaining to
spatial planning and the specific context of the Gaeltacht. It is hoped that this
submission effectively illustrates the intrinsic link between housing and economic
development in the region, emphasizing that all matters concerning the Gaeltacht
must be considered holistically and cannot be addressed in isolation.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of this submission are noted and the support in principle from Üdarås
na Gaeltachta is welcomed. Galway County Council collaborate with Üdarås on an
ongoing basis and are committed to doing in future to support the Gaeltacht across
County Galway.
Submission noted.
Submission noted. The Local Authority promotes and supports the use and vitality
of the Irish language.
The contents of Appendix 1 are considered and noted.
The comments with respect to the population/demographic changes are noted. The
changes proposed as part of Variation No.l with respect to Residential Phase 2
lands apply to all zoned settlements in County Galway.
Submission noted.
The importance of An Cheathrü Rua as a Gaeltacht Small Growth Village of County
Galway is noted and this has been reflected previously in the Galway County
Development Plan. The Planning Authority is keen to engage and collaborate with
relevant stakeholders to facilitate the delivery of critical infrastructure and services
to all parts of the County, including Gaeltacht settlements. The purpose of Variation
1 is to increase options for housing delivery across the zoned serviced settlements
of the County.
Submission noted. Variation No. 1 seeks to facilitate the increased annual housing
allocation as set out in the Section 28 Housing Growth Requirements. The
importance of housing delivery in Gaeltacht settlements is noted and this is reflected
in supporting Policy Objectives within the Galway County Development Plan.
The scope of Variation No.l applies to all zoned settlements within the County
including the Small Growth Towns and Small Growth Villages. The scope of the
Vacant Homes Officer in the Local Authority includes the entire County including
Gaeltacht areas, which may assist in addressing vacancy in Gaeltacht areas.
The strategic importance of the County Galway Gaeltacht is recognised and noted.
20
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Noted. The Planning Authority collaborates with Üdarås na Gaeltachta during any
County Development Pfan review and the narrative and policy objectives pertaining
to Gaeltacht areas would be informed in part by the NPF and RSES.
DM standards apply to the Gaeltacht region as other parts of County Galway.
The Planning Authority supports the delivery of appropriate infrastructure to all parts
of County Galway.
Noted. The Planning Authority supports the delivery of infrastructure in tandem with
the release and development of R2 lands.
The Planning Authority supports the delivery of appropriate infrastructure in
accordance with proper planning and sustainable development.
The Planning Authority will engage with Üdaras na Gaeltachta during the CDP
review which will have a much broader scope. Further information with respect to
infrastructure capacity in the Small Growth Towns and Small Growth Villages will be
available to perspective applicants through the Pre Planning Advice service.
Noted.
Noted.
Variation I provides for greater choice with respect to housing delivery. While the
Local Authority agrees with the principle of investment in the Galway Gaeltacht, if
falls outside the scope of Variation 1.
An Economic Development Strategy is currently being prepared jointly by Galway
City and County Councils.
The HNDA has been revised and updated as part of Variation No. 1. The Planning
Authority will engage with Ü na G as necessary on site specific projects. See Chief
Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation I(i) with respect to the
Core Strategy.
Noted. See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation 1 (i)
with respect to the Core Strategy.
Noted.
The release of Residential Phase 2 lands as appropriate for housing will be
underpinned by the updated Housing Need and Demand Assessment. A sufficient
quantum of residentially zoned lands are in place across the County to provide
appropriate Headroom. A degree of flexibility applies with respect to densities.
Regarding the Core Strategy, see Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40.
Noted.
Noted.
Submission noted.
delivery.
Noted.
Variation 1 seeks to provide additional choice for housing
21
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Noted. See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 Recommendation 1 (i)
with respect to the Core Strategy.
Noted. The Core Strategy Housing allocation remains unchanged.
As advised previously Variation No.l is underpinned by the reviewed HNDA. The
Planning Authority will continue to collaborate and engage with Üdarås Na
Gaeltachta and support the Gaeltacht region as appropriate and necessary.
Noted. The Planning Authority recoginse the link between housing and infrastructure
development and will continue to collaborate with (J na G on such matters into the
future.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
Cllr. T. Welby stated that this was an extensive submission which seemed to be
more relevant to the Review of the Development Plan process. He noted that as a
representative of Gaeltacht and Conamara, that this submission ought to be
discussed at Municipal District level.
Cllr. M. Lee echoed Cllr. T. Welby's comments and suggested that the Municipal
District meet with Udaras na Gaeltachta to discuss it. He noted the lack of housing
and infrastructure in the South Conamara area. He then noted his agreement with
the Minister's comments on Uisce Eireann needing to press on and develop
infrastructure, as without their progress, Conamara would continue to be left behind.
Cllr. M. Leainde agreed with previous comments and stated that these huge issues
are affecting rural Ireland and that places such as Lettermullen and Letterfrack were
being left behind. He stated that they really needed to press ahead on that and that
the lack of adequate sewerage infrastructure was a major issue.
An Comh. O Curraoin stated that Udaras requires full support and lamented the
situation of housing in Conamara and the poor quality of sewerage schemes.
Cllr. E. Mannion stated that this was not the forum for this discussion and agreed
with Cllr. T. Welby's suggestion and further added that a workshop type of meeting
with Planners and Udaras na Gaeltachta should be held in advance of Review of
CDP. Cllr. T. Welby agreed with suggestion of Workshop.
CE L Conneally noted that wastewater facilities and road access were critical
infrastructure in all areas of Galway, and that Galway County Council held regular
dialogue with Uisce Eireann and TII and noted their significant budgetary constraints.
He then stated that Uisce Eireann's notification of rollouts of Wastewater Treatment
Plants (WWTPs), as smaller plants in rural areas or even private WWTPs was being
discussed currently. He suggested that it would be important for the Members to
discuss these options at MD level. He then noted that Galway County Council were
granting planning in Conamara, but that the demographic of those applicants living
in Conamara was worth further analysis. He noted that an assessment of this
demographic at MD level, during the Workshop, is a good idea.
22
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Ms. Loughnane stated that Galway County Council had reached out to Udaras na
Gaeltachta prior to the commencement of the Variation process in order to engage
with them but had received no response.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Welby, seconded by Cllr.
T. Grealish and agreed by the Members.
GLW - UISCE EIREANN
Pg 25-27
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Variation
and notes the primary purpose of the Variation. The submission notes that Uisce
Éireann (UÉ) are preparing a summary of key investment in water services
infrastructure in Galway County via the Revenue Control 4 (RC4) plan to 2029 and
the plan for additional growth funding to 2030. It is noted that this is to be sent to the
Local Authority.
Parts A and B of Proposed Variation No. 1
The submission notes that the Proposed Variation does not update the Core
Strategy and states it relies on population estimates when assessing future water
and wastewater capacity. Any significant increase in demand, especially in
constrained settlements, may require reassessment of available capacity.
The renewed focus on developing Residential Phase 2 lands is welcomed, provided
it follows proper planning, sustainable development, and sequential growth.
Previous submissions already outlined information on the serviceability of these
lands across relevant Local Area Plans of Ballinasloe, Tuam, Athenry, Loughrea and
Gort.
Increased residential
densities
in the MASP, Key Towns,
and
Strategic/Self-Sustaining Towns may place higher demand on water and wastewater
infrastructure and may require site-specific capacity assessments.
A high-level review indicates that many Residential Phase 2 sites lack nearby water
or sewer networks, though they are close to recently built or ongoing developments.
Third-party agreements may be needed where networks are not yet taken in charge
and further comments are provided as follows:
Watermain upgrades may be required where existing mains are small (s80mm); if
no Uisce Éireann project exists, upgrades must be developer-funded.
Sewer and/or pumping station upgrades may be needed, especially with higher
densities or small sewer diameters (s150mm); developer-funded where no UÉ
project exists.
Existing Uisce ireann assets within zoned lands must be protected or diverted,
requiring diversion agreements where necessary, with greater separation distances
23
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
near trunk infrastructure. Further information is provided at an included link in the
submission.
Settlement Capacity Audit Comments
The submission notes that the Settlement Capacity Audit uses data from the August
2025 Capacity Register but emphasises that these registers only indicate capacity
for wastewater treatment and water supply for settlements and not the
capacity/availability of sewers and water main networks within settlements.
The submission outlines that the 'Notes' for Athenry advise that I.. applications to I-JÉ
to connect to the wastewater network will be assessed on a case-by-case basis' and
outlines that this is the case for all settlements whereby ail new residential,
commercial, and industrial developments must be assessed case-by-case through
Uisce Éireann's New Connections process. New connections are subject to the
Connections Charging Policy, and third-party agreements are required where
developments rely on private property or private water services infrastructure.
Small Growth Towns and Villages were not included in the Audit, despite many
containing Residential Phase 2 lands. Uisce Éireann is willing to engage further
with Galway County Council on the serviceability of these sites.
Chief Executive Response
Galway County Council note the submission and welcome the indication that the
summary of key investments will soon be circulated to the Local Authority. The LA
are also engaged with the Housing Activation Office with respect to
water/wastewater infrastructure and have identified the requirements to remedy any
barriers associated with same.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
It is noted Uisce Éireann have previously provided consultation feedback on
Residential Phase 2 Lands and this has been taken into account as part of this
process.
While increased densities have now been proposed in some settlements, Galway
County Council note the use of the Capacity Registers from August 2025 in the
SCA and that high demand on water and wastewater infrastructure may require
site specific capacity assessments. This has been highlighted in the SCA (See
Appendix A).
It is noted that I-JÉ have done a high-level review of Residential Phase 2 lands and
note many sites currently do not have water or sewer nearby but are adjacent tolnear
housing developments currently under construction or have been completed. It is
considered that third party agreements, and diversion agreements are items to
be considered during preapplication and the Development Management stage.
Where I.JÉ note that some upgrades may be required through developer funding it is
considered that this is a matter for consideration at specific project stage.
The case-by-case new connections process is a matter for consideration at specific
project level.
24
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The comments regarding the small growth towns and small growth villages Galway
County Council are noted. The Local Authority would welcome further with Uisce
Éireann on these settlements.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Recommendation to GLW-C200-40
Additional comments have been included in the SCA which has been appended to
this report and a clarification that applications to IJÉ to connect are on a case by
case basis. See updated SCA (Appendix A).
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-14 HEALTH AND SAFETY AUTHORITY (HSA)
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission sets out the prescribed status of the authority under Article 13 of the
Planning & Development Regulations 2001-2015 and sections 11-13 & 24 of the Act.
The submission links to the HSA guidance document for Land Use Planning, and
outlines 4 No. items the HSA would expect to see contained in Planning Guidelines:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Policy in relation to major accident sites which reflects the intentions of Article
13 of Directive 2012/18/EU.
The consultation distances and generic advice, as indicated on maps of major
accident sites.
A policy on the siting of new major hazard establishments.
Mention of the following notified establishments:
a.
b.
c.
Colas Bitumen emulsion, Oranmore, Co Galway, H91 D934
Circle K Galway Terminal, Galway harbour, Galway, H91 X030
Tynagh Energy Ltd, Tynagh, Derryfrench, Loughrea, Co Galway,
H62XY3
The submission also contains a note on the HSA approach towards the Provision
of Land-Use Planning advice.
Chief Executive Response
The Chief Executive welcomes the submission of the HSA, and the submission is
noted.
25
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 1 6th February 2026
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. M. Hoade, seconded by Cllr.
D. Killjlea and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-43 ELECTRICITY SUPPLY BOARD (ESB)
Pg 28
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The summary welcomes and acknowledges each part of Variation No. 1 while noting
that providing a secure, reliable and efficient energy transmission and distribution
infrastructure is fundamental to powering and heating homes and businesses, as
well as supporting the decarbonization of transport. The submission highlights that
the Governments new housing plan called "Delivering Homes, Building
Communities" recognises that each new home constructed today requires roughly
double the electrical capacity as those built before 2019. The submission notes that
electricity networks must be expanded and reinforced in the future to support the
delivery of 300,000 homes.
Overview of ESB Strategy
The submission outlines that ESB are embracing new technologies and investing in
sustainable energy solutions with an objective to develop and connect renewables
to decarbonize the electricity system by 2040. ESB's progress towards carbon net
zero operations is consistent with the NPF and RSES for the Northern and Western
Region.
ESB Networks
The submission outlines how ESB are committed to expanding the electricity
network across Ireland and notes physical upgrades as well as smart, flexible and
digitally enabled solutions for future growth.
Energy Infrastructure - Planning Policy
The submission also outlines relevant planning policy while noting that ESB
Networks' PR6 Business Plan proposes a €13.4 billion programme.
Energy Infrastructure — Transmission and Distribution
ESB is actively monitoring and assessing electricity network capacity in County
Galway to ensure it can support current and future residential, commercial, and
industrial growth. The submission emphasises the need for early coordination with
Galway County Council to zone and secure suitable sites for essential electricity
infrastructure. The submission also outlines the importance of early engagement on
public infrastructure projects for cost effective delivery and minimal disruption.
The electricity grid in County Galway is currently constrained, limiting its ability to
accommodate new development, including renewable energy projects. ESB
operates 21 high-voltage substations in the county, but significant reinforcement of
both transmission and distribution networks is urgently required. The submission
26
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
outlines key projects to strengthen network resilience and accommodate future
demand.
The submission notes recent national policy changes, including the revised NPF
and new Section 28 Housing Growth Guidelines, and ESB are committed to
working closely with Galway County Council to align future zoning and
infrastructure planning with updated housing targets and ensure timely delivery of
electricity infrastructure.
Chief Executive Response
The submission from ESB is noted. Galway County Council will continue to work
with the ESB and welcome the engagement and future collaboration with the ESB
on key infrastructure projects in the County. The Local Authority will coordinate
closely with the ESB to identify suitable sites for delivery of key infrastructure and
also will endeavour to address constraints in the network in the future.
The submission refers to specific projects in Galway, and it is noted that there are a
number of Policy Objectives and associated narrative text in the County
Development Plan in relation to Electricity Infrastructure, Climate and Renewables.
Policy Objective EG I for example is to Support and promote the sustainable
improvement and expansion of the electricity transmission and distribution network
that supply the County, while taking into consideration landscape, residential,
amenity and environmental considerations.
Only matters raised that relate directly to the contents of the Proposed Variation can
be considered and therefore it is not appropriate during this process to identify sites
for electricity infrastructure, however any future relevant consultation will include
early engagement with ESB.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
Cllr. S. Cunniffe queried the idea of resource constraints at Uisce Eireann, as they
are the key enablers who are advising they cannot action anything due to a lack of
funding. He then lamented the Govemment blaming local authorities for not zoning
adequate swathes of land, while the key stakeholder Uisce Eireann is claiming a lack
of resources. Cathaoirleach D. Collins suggested that he could further discuss that
topic during meeting with ESB after lunch.
Cllr. D. Connolly queried the limited capacity of Ballinasloe within the SCA, noting
that although housing delivery assistance was the goal, that services simply were
not adequate and the situation in Ballinasloe had been dragging on for many years.
CE L. Conneally stated the Council was doing its part of the job in terms of assisting
housing delivery now in bringing the County's strategic reserve of R2 lands into RI .
He further advised that this Council decision will put pressure on infrastructure
providers to service zoned residential land.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
l. Canning and agreed by the Members.
27
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
LOCAL COUNCILLORS AND TD'S
GLW C200-28 - CLLR DONAGH KILLILEA
pg 30
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests to extend the existing Industrial Park known as
"Glenascaul Industrial Park" to be zoned 'Industrial' in line with present-day on-site
activity.
This submission, made by Cllr Donagh Killilea, includes a previous submission made
to the Galway County Development Plan 2022-2028 Draft to extend the Glenascaul
Industrial Park in Oranmore.
The request seeks to zone approximately 2.79 hectares of land to Industrial to
accommodate a new bus garage and parking depot. There is a shortage of lands
available to purchase in the area and the extension of an existing industrial estate
would be in keeping with the activities on site. The landowner intends to move
operations from Galway City in anticipation of the outer bypass, providing a facility
that could also serve other private coach companies.
Key arguments for the proposal include the strategic location of the lands near the
M6 Motorway and R381, the lack of environmental, archaeological or cultural
heritage constraints, there is no recognised flood zone or recorded flood events. The
lands are also fully serviced with both water and electricity services.
To support this, the applicant requests the reinstatement of past planning policies
(Policy ED3 and ED9) that favoured the consolidation and expansion of
established rural enterprise nodes. By facilitating this expansion, the development
aims to prevent unnecessary heavy vehicle traffic through Oranmore village while
supporting the growth of a private public transport provider that currently operates
four licensed routes in Galway City.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands is noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the Proposed Variation to the
County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed
draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
proposed variation and any submission that does not relate to the proposed variation
will not be considered.
Note that the existing County Development Plan contains a suite of policy objectives
that support rural enterprise. The addition of policy objectives relating to rural
enterprise again cannot be considered as part of Variation No.l.
28
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-29 CLLR DONAGH KILLILEA
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission proposes that all lands marked Residential Phase 2 in the current
Tuam Local Area Plan should be upgraded to Residential Phase 1.
This submission, made by Cllr Donagh Killilea highlights the significant growth in
the need for more lands to become available for residential development in Tuam
Town.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands is noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the proposed draft variation to the
County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed
draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
proposed variation and any submission that does not relate to the Proposed
Variation will not be considered.
Variation 1 results in both Residential Phase 1 and Residential Phase 2 zonings
being assessed in a similar manner, should any planning application be forthcoming,
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
K. McHugh Farag and agreed by the Members.
GI-W C200-30 - CLLR DONAGH KILLILEA
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests that lands be re-zoned from Agriculture to 'Residential
Phase 2' within the current Tuam Local Area Plan.
This submission made by Cllr Donagh Killilea, includes a mention of Cllr Killilea's
previous submission (GLW-C200-29), which called for all 'Residential Phase 2' lands
to be upgraded to 'Residential Phase 1' within the Tuam LAP. Furthermore, this
29
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
submission states that additional rezoning should occur, whereby lands zoned under
'Agriculture' should be rezoned to Residential Phase 2' within the current Tuam LAP.
This submission suggests that the proposal to rezone along with the previous
recommendations (set out in GLW-C200-29), would ensure that enough land is
secured in order to future proof the rapidly expanding needs for the delivery of
residential development in Tuam.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands from Agriculture to Residential
Phase 2 are noted.
However, the rezoning of these lands in Tuam does not form part of this proposed
variation. Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may
be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such,
this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be
considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that
submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the proposed
variation and any submission that does not relate to the proposed variation will not
be considered.
Notwithstanding the scope of the Variation, it is considered that a sufficient quantity
of housing lands have been identified in Tuam to meet the new housing
requirements.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
M. Hoade and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-32 - CLLR DONAGH KILLILEA
Pg 32/33
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission proposes amendments to the variation of Galway County
Development Plan 2022-2028.
This submission offers to propose amendments to residential density with the
specific requests for settlement reclassification and infrastructure-led growth.
The proposed amendment to Chapter 15 of the Galway County Development Plan
2022-2028 seeks to refine residential density targets and reclassify settlements
based on existing infrastructure capacity.
Regarding density, the proposal recommends ranges such as:
• Amend MASP Density Town Centre/lnfill/Brownfield/Greenfield to 30-48 or
(site specific). Outer Suburban/Greenfield to 30-48
30
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Amend Key Towns - Town Centre/lnfill/Brownfield to 35-45 or site specific.
Outer Suburban/Greenfield to 30-45
Amend Strategic Potential/Self Sustaining Towns
Town
Centre/lnfill/Brownfield 25-35 (or site specific). Edge of Centre/Greenfield to
25 (or site specific).
Amend Small Growth Towns - Town Centre/lnfill/Brownfield 25 (or site
specific). Edge of Centre/Greenfield to 20
Amend Small Growth Villages - Village Centre/lnfill/BrownfieId to 20-25. Edge
of Centre/Greenfield to 15-20
Submission also requests that any Small Growth Village, such as Milltown, Tuam,
be elevated to the status of a Small Growth Town if it possesses verified capacity in
both water and wastewater infrastructure. Submission wishes to support the growth
of these rural areas that have serviced lands for future growth. It is also stated that
any village that has a water and wastewater capacity be specifically mentioned in
the revised County Development Plan as an area that can be allowed to grow with
increased housing densities under an elevated category.
Chief Executive Response
The increased density levels set within Table 15.1 of the Development Management
Standards are considered sufficient to address the requirements of the Section 28
Guidelines. In addition, there is a degree of flexibility with respect to density levels
at appropriate locations. Tuam is designated as a Key Town in the RSES and
Galway County Development Plan. The status of settlements such as Milltown will
be considered as part of the review of the County Development Plan as this would
not fall within the scope of this Variation.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
C. Keane and agreed by the Members.
Cllr. D. Killilea welcomed increasing densities in MASP areas and stated it would
also be welcomed for Key Towns. In response Ms. Loughnane clarified that the
flexibility regarding densities at appropriate locations had been addressed with the
update of table 15.1 within DM Standards of the CDP. She then advised that
Milltown's classification as a settlement area would be considered during the CDP
Review process but was not possible during this process.
In response to a query from Cllr. D. Geraghty in relation to RZLT, Ms. Loughnane
advised that there would be liability for farmers for RZLT only if their farming activities
occurred on residentially zoned land and advised that no additional land had been
zoned in this Variation.
Cllr. A. Harney interjected querying whether there was further engagement with the
Department over the issue of farmers actively farming their land being liable for
RZLT. Ms. Loughnane advised that the public consultations for the RZLT's Draft
Annual Map 2027 and RZLT Final Map 2026 were now open for submissions. She
advised that only the townland of Gort appeared on the Annual Draft Map and that
all other settlement areas were affected by the Final Map. She advised that she had
31
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
spoken a number of times to the Department on the subject of RZLT previously and
had made some suggestions with respect to the application of RZLT.
GENERAL SUBMISSIONS
GLW C200-4 - ARDANT PROPERTY INVESTMENT LTD
Pg 34
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Ardent Property Investment Ltd is requesting a zone change from "Town Centre"
to "Residential 1" in Maigh Cuilinn. The submission sets out a case for residential
zoning.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands from Town Centre to Residential 1
development is noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the proposed draft variation to the
County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed
draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
Proposed Variation and any submission that does not relate to the Proposed
Variation will not be considered.
Notwithstanding the above, the site in question is zoned "Town Centre". The
proposed use of "Apartments" is "Permitted in Principle" on this land use zoning
subject to compliance with the relevant policy objectives, standards and
requirements set out in this plan and the principles of proper planning and
sustainable development.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. D. Geraghty and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-5 - BRACKENSIDE INVESTMENTS LTD.
Pg 34/35
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Brackenside Investments Ltd is requesting a zone change from "Residential Phase
2" to "Residential Phase 1" at lands comprising approximately 1.6 hectares located
32
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
at Kilgarve, Ballinasloe, Co. Galway. Submission advises that this would ensure
prompt delivery of housing, with development commencing within 5 years, in line
with CDP Policy Objective CS5 (Core Strategy) and the variation's focus on
accelerating Phase 2 lands where feasible.
Also seeking to apply a site-specific maximum density of 40 dwelling units per
hectare on the site given its favorable location and accessibility to Ballinasloe Town
Centre and local amenities, the sites current level of infrastructure, the sequential
nature of the site to adjoining existing estates, and precedent of developments with
higher densities within Ballinasloe.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands from Residential Phase 2 to
Residential Phase 1 is noted.
However, the rezoning of the lands in question do not form part of the proposed draft
variation to the County Development Plan. Therefore, only submissions that relate
directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation
of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the
current variation process and cannot be considered.
Part of the site outlined is zoned Residential Phase 1 and Residential Phase 2.
Variation No. 1 results in both zonings being assessed in similar manner, should any
planning application be forthcoming.
The density set for Ballinasloe is for 35DPH, with additional flexibility through the DM
Standards.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-6 - DAVID JELLY
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Submission welcomes the proposed variation's emphasis on improving housing
delivery.
Submission requests a land use zoning change from Town Centre to Residential
Phasel at lands comprising approximately 0.87 hectares located at Teampall
Éanna, Church Road, Ballyquirke West, Maigh Cuilinn.
It is stated that this would support a planning application to amend an existing
permission (currently for commercial units) to residential use. It is stated that this
amended permission would facilitate the delivery of 4, I-bedroom apartments at the
site, within a development already under construction. The planning rationale behind
33
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
such a change is to relieve pressure on the housing system in Maigh Cuilinn, the
existing high demand for 1- and 2-bedroom units in the town, and the high amount
of commercial vacancy. The submission also argues that this rezoning and
subsequent planning application would align with objectives HS4 and SHI.
Chief Executive Response
The rezoning of the subject lands do not form part of the proposed draft variation to
the County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the Proposed
Variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
Proposed Variation and any submission that does not relate to the Proposed
Variation will not be considered.
Notwithstanding the above, the site in question is zoned C' Town Centre". The land
use zoning matrix indicates that a proposal for Apartments is "Permitted in Principle"
on this land use zoning. This use is one that the Local Authority accepts in principle,
subject to compliance with the relevant policy objectives, standards and
requirements set out in the County Development Plan and the principles of proper
planning and sustainable development.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. D. Geraghty and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-8 - URBAN ARQ ON BEHALF OF GEORGE FRANCIS
MCGRATH
Pg 36/37
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Submission includes:
Site Location map
Site Layout Map
Land registration map
An extracted land use zoning map of Oranmore.
Minutes of a Special Council meeting held on the 9th of May 2022 in
which the aforementioned mapping error was discussed.
This submission relates to the zoning map rectification within Oranmore. Submission
states that the lands in question are again subject to a continued mapping error,
34
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
effectively not applying Town Centre zoning to the full extent of the site. Submission
gives overview of the planning history of the site and advises that although the
elected members voted to rectify the mapping error, to remove the open space
designation and replace it with town centre across the fuli extent of the site, this
instruction was not implemented by the planning authority. Meeting minutes are also
included with the submission (May 2022).
Submission requests that the Planning Authority consider taking this opportunity to
address this legacy matter. Submission further notes that sites immediately to the
north and south of the subject site are likewise zoned town centre, however the
zoning extends to the full depth of same sites down to the tributary stream.
It is again re-iterated in the submission that full Town Centre zoning would be in the
public interest, directly addressing the housing emergency via the Government's
2025 Housing Growth Requirements Guidelines.
Submission also requests that the site is removed from the Architectural
Conservation Area (ACA). The rationale behind the sites removal from the ACA is
the sites poor architectural and streetscape quality and impact on site viability.
Chief Executive Response
The submission is noted.
This zoning rectification from Open Space/Recreation and Amenity to Town Centre
is the means in which Galway County Council is amending this mapping error. This
submission also proposes changing the zoning in the surrounding area. The
additional area is at elevated risk of flooding. Zoning this area for town centre uses
would be inappropriate and would not pass the Justification Test as set out in the
Ministerial Guidelines on Flood Risk Management (2009). As a result, the proposal
would not be in compliance with the Ministerial Guidelines — which must be complied
with.
The request to remove the site off the Architectural Conservation Area is not
warranted in this instance and it does not fall within the scope of Variation 1. The
council does not agree that the sites are of poor architectural and streetscape quality
inherently. Any negative impact they currently have is due to a lack of maintenance.
As outlined the in Objective AH5 the council seeks to maintain the existing stock:
"Promote the maintenance and appropriate re-use of the existing stock of buildings
with architectural merit as a more sustainable option to their demolition and
redevelopment."
A brief description of the Oranmore ACA is placed within Appendix 7 of the County
Development Plan 2022 - 2028:
"The core of the town demonstrates a strong sense of enclosure, created by a
loosely knit arrangement of plots and buildings. This is created by terraces, pairs
and detached houses, with occasional gaps, providing glimpses to outbuildings to
the rear. The typical plot widths are narrow, with buildings fronting directly onto the
footpath in the core of the town, and large rear gardens"
35
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
While the two buildings fronting onto the main street are in disrepair, this does not
exclude them from inclusion on the ACA. The buildings have not degraded to such
a point to dampen their adherence to the character of the prevailing street layout,
and they still contribute positively to the sense of enclosure on Main Street. A further
key objective of the ACA is the enhancement of the existing architectural character
as can be seen in objective AH4:
"Protect, conserve and enhance the special character of the Architectural
Conservation Areas (ACA) included in this plan through the appropriate
management and control of the design, location and layout of new development,
modifications, alterations or extensions to existing structures, surviving historic plots
and street patterns and/or modifications to the character or setting of the
Architectural Conservation Area."
Therefore, as the form of the two buildings clearly align with the description of the
Oranmore ACA, and the only negative impacts of the sites are due to a lack of
maintenance, the objectives of the ACA and the proper planning and sustainable
development of Oranmore would be better served by the timely maintenance and
enhancement of the site, not from the sites removal from the ACA.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
Cllr. P. Feeney opined that the submission concerned a mapping error which was
not picked up on during the CDP process and this was the first opportunity for the
Members to rectify it. He stated that the landowner had felt very disadvantaged by
the error during the previous process, as the OPW and Flooding Consultants have
since confirmed that the land is within the flood plain. He noted the tendency to not
zone lands in flood plains made sense, but that such a blanket approach would
negatively affect some landowners.
CE L. Conneally stated that as a general point, Galway County Council would not
apologise for flood risk maps and flood plain identification, as Galway County Council
uses this information to inform landuse zoning which in turn informs good decision-
making regarding flooding and flood risk assessment.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Geraghty, seconded by Cllr.
S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-12 - DNG MARTIN O'CONNOR ON BEHALF OF ARDENT
PROPERTY INVESTMENT LTD
pg 38
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Submission request rezoning from Town Centre to Residential Phase 1 in Maigh
Cuilinn. The submission sets out a case for residential zoning.
Chief Executive Response
Submission noted. However, the zoning of the lands in question do not form part of
the proposed draft variation to the County Development Plan. Only submissions that
36
Minutes of Special Council Meeting heid on 16th February 2026
relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken into account in the
preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls outside the
scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at this time. As
stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can only be
considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and any submission
that does not relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered.
Note that in certain circumstances a proposed mix of town centre commercial and
residential (apartments) may be acceptable on Town Centre zoned lands.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-17 - CORBWELL DESIGN ON BEHALF OF SIMON
CARNEY
Pg 38
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission relates to a zoning request for a site in Ballinasloe. The site is
currently zoned community facilities and is sought to be changed to Residential
Phase 1 . The submission outlines the rationale for rezoning.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. However, the rezoning of the lands in
question do not form part of the proposed variation to the County Development Plan.
Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken
into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request
falls outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at
this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions
can only be considered if they relate to an element of the proposed variation and any
submission that does not relate to the proposed variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. A. Harney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-19 - URBAN PLANNING AND DESIGN SERVICES ON
BEHALF OF MARK COFFEY OF COFFEY CONSTRUCTION LTD
Pg 39/41
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
37
Minutes of Speciat Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission received relates to two parcels of land in Oranmore and Athenry.
Oranmore
The Oranmore lands comprise of just over 26 hectares of land located outside of the
settlement boundary for the Town.
In the first instance the submission seeks to extend the Oranmore settlement
boundary and zone (9.64Ha) of the landbank zoned either Residential Phase 1 or
Residential Phase 2. Alongside this, the submission is seeking to have this landbank
included within the Settlement Capacity Audit to assess the sites current level of
infrastructure provision. The submission also requests that policy objective 'GCMA
1 Residential Development' (and others related to the Residential Phase 2 lands in
the GCDP and in the Local Area Plans) be amended to align with the intention of the
Proposed Variation to allow all Residential Phase 2 lands to be developed within the
lifetime of the GCDP. The submission claims there could be a risk of a lack of clarity
and guidance around development of Residential Phase 2 lands if this is not done.
The submission goes on to extensively list the details of the proposed site. It outlines
the following:
• Site Location and Context
• Site Assessment and Development Potential
Planning History
• Planning Policy Context; Density
• Planning Assessment and Motivation
Submission also suggests uses for the subject lands to include Residential; Open
Space/Recreation (Flood Risk areas) and Future Reserve.
The submission argues positively and highlights need for the sites rezoning to RI ,
and if not RI , to R2. It also highlights the residential zoned lands that are developed.
In Chapter 7 of the submission, the subject lands are assessed under the Proposed
Variation. In this section the submission notes how the revised Housing Strategy and
Housing Need and Demand Assessment requires higher housing targets focused on
the Metropolitan area, which this proposed zoning change could help to achieve.
Table 7.1 outlines how the submission aligns with the new updated narrative and
policy objectives in the Proposed Variation. This submission suggests that the above
policy objective GCMA 1 (and others related to the Residential Phase 2 lands in the
GCDP and in the Local Area Plans) should be amended to clearly align with the
intention of the Proposed Variation to allow all R2 lands to be developed within the
lifetime of the GCDP. The submission then examines the SCA and notes that much
of the R2 lands currently identified are further away from the Town Centre then the
subject lands and also notes that much of the RI land is already developed and no
longer capable of more development. According to the submission, the amount of
developable greenfield land is lacking to support the updated targets of the revised
NPF and is also lacking to support the 50% additional provision found in the Section
28 Guidelines. The submission suggests that the Proposed Variation should not just
focus on the R2 lands currently identified within the GCDP but should also identify
other suitably located lands that can also be zoned for residential development.
Athenry
The submission makes reference to approximately 7.2 hectares of lands zoned
Residential Phase 2 in Athenry and the case is made for these lands to be zoned
38
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Residential Phase 1 within the lifetime of the Athenry LAP. The case made for the
rezoning of these lands again comprises of the following sections: Introduction;
Planning Policy Context; Planning Assessment and Motivation; Assessment Under
Proposed Variation No. 1 and Conclusion. These lands are located within the lands
identified for the Caheroyn UFP.
Submission requests that if these lands remain Residential Phase 2 under Variation
1 that the lands be prioritised for development in recognition of their suitability for
development. Submission references that the lands relate to Policy Objective ASP
6 of the Athenry Local Area Plan and the revisions to Section 2.4.7 of the GCDP
under Variation 1. Submission supports the intention of the Variation. Requests
additional Guidelines with the Variation and repeats that Policy Objectives which
restrict the development of Residential Phase 2 lands including GCMAI and other
Policy Objectives in Local Area Plans be amended. Submission states that there is
a risk that there will be a lack of clarity and guidance regarding the ability to develop
the Residential Phase 2 lands with respect to planning applications/appeals that are
submitted for residential development.
Submission also references adjoining lands (Parcel B) that are zoned existing
residential. Submission requests that this parcel be considered as part of the
Caheroyn Urban Framework Plan. Submission considers that the lands in question
could qualify for a density range of 25- 40 Dwellings per hectare. Submission
highlights the potential of Athenry to accommodate additional growth and notes that
the Core Strategy Population allocation in the County Development Plan is based
on the NPF 2018 and notes that the population allocation in the NPF for the Region
have increased, but that this has not been reflected in the RSES or GCDP. It is
requested that the population growth targets are reviewed, and that consideration
be given to increasing the housing allocations and amount of zoned land for
residential development within Athenry.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted, however zoning of additional lands does
not fall within the scope of Variation No. 1 . It is considered that sufficient zoned lands
have been identified across all zoned settlements in the County to support the
delivery of the revised housing targets as set out in the Section 28 Guidelines
including headroom. In addition, the edits to the policy objectives and narrative are
considered to be sufficient in allowing Residential Phase 2 lands across the County
to be brought forward for development as appropriate including lands at Caheroyn.
Other zoned lands such as Town Centre; Mixed Use Commercial, Residential infill
and other Brownfield sites will also contribute to the provision of housing in the
County.
The Housing Need and Demand Assessment has been revised and updated to take
account of the increased housing targets for County Galway.
Additional clarification has been added to the SCA at Appendix A.
In relation to the request to include lands in the Caheroyn UFP, the Caheroyn UFP
forms part of the Athenry LAP 2024 — 2030 and does not form part of Variation
process.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 in relation to the Core Strategy
39
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Recommendation to GLW-C200-40 with respect to the Core
Strategy and Settlement Capacity Audit.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Grealish, seconded by Cllr.
K. McHugh Farag and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-21
MCDONAGH
pg 42
- CORBWELL DESIGN ON BEHALF OF PAT
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests the zoning of currently unzoned land at Renville West,
Oranmore to RI Residential.
The rationale for this request is based on the site's immediate proximity to existing
"The Bramley" residential development, with the submission highlighting that
rezoning would allow for a logical, orderly, and compact extension of the established
neighbourhood while utilizing existing and planned infrastructure. The submission
asserts that this proposed zoning would align with the National Planning
Framework's goals for sequential growth (NPO 3C) and increased housing supply
(NPO 33), as the lands are capable of being serviced and benefit from nearby social
infrastructure, such as schools and public transport. Ultimately, the submission
concludes that the proposal supports sustainable development goals and provides
a clear, plan-led framework for delivering housing.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the zoning of lands for residential development is noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the proposed draft variation to the
County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed
draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
Proposed Variation and any submission that does not relate to the Proposed
Variation will not be considered.
Notwithstanding the scope of the Variation, it is considered that a sufficient quantity
of housing lands has been identified across the County to meet the new housing
requirements. In addition, there are currently no zoned lands at Renville West.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
40
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. P. Feeney, seconded by Cllr.
D. Geraghty and agreed by the Members.
GI-W C200-25
MCDONAGH
42
- CORBWELL DESIGN ON BEHALF OF PAT
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests in the first instance a preplanning consultation for a
proposed offline motorway service station to serve Junction 19 of the M6 motorway
at Oranmore. Drawings and graphics of the proposal have been submitted.
Leveraging the site's strategic location adjoining the national motorway network, the
proposal outlines a purpose-built plaza designed to provide essential refuelling, rest,
and food facilities for both private and commercial motorists. The proposed scheme
features architectural design details fuel forecourt, HGV service areas, food court,
retail, (EV) charging points, and landscaping. The applicant asserts that this
development aligns with the National Planning Framework 2040, the Galway County
Development Plan 2022-2028, and TII Service Area Policy by enhancing regional
connectivity and ensuring driver safety. Ultimately, the submission serves as a
request for a pre-planning consultation meeting with Galway County Council.
The submission also requests the Local Authority to consider rectification of the land
use zoning map (or advise the appropriate mechanism/timing) to provide for a
Motorway Service Area/Commercial zoning objective on these lands.
Chief Executive Response
It is suggested that the Planning Departments Preapplication Advice service is
utilised in this instance.
It is also noted that only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft
variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time as the lands do not form part of this Variation
process. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions
can only be considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and
any submission that does not relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. P. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
P. Keaveney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-27 - PHE ENGINEERING ON BEHALF OF KEVIN MORAN
Pg 43
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
41
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
This submission requests a rezoning of approximately 1.45 hectares of land in Baile
Chlåir from Residential Phase 2 to 'Un-zoned' lands suitable for six serviced sites
for single dwelling houses.
It is stated that the primary argument for this change is the land's unsuitability for
large-scale development due to severe infrastructural constraints, specifically the
poor access via a side road off the L-71105 (Lakeview) which lacks the capacity for
increased traffic and cannot be widened because of existing homes built close to the
road. It is noted the Local authority and An Coimisiün Pleanåta have refused two
developments within this area due to poor road access. Furthermore, it is stated that
the site is currently disconnected from the Uisce Éireann sewer and water mains.
The significant costs associated with these infrastructural upgrade works make any
development, including a high-density development economically unfeasible for a
plot of this relatively small size.
The submission also highlights that these concerns were reinforced during a pre-
planning meeting where it was indicated that larger developments would be refused
based on insufficient access. The submission also references a subsequent on-site
meeting, where it was agreed the existing road could not support the traffic or
required infrastructure such as footpaths and cycle lanes.
By rezoning the land for six serviced sites, the applicant intends to provide housing
for residents under Rural Housing Policy Objectives RHI to RH3, including an
enurement clause, while arguing that this shift will not negatively impact overall
housing targets due to other ongoing developments in the area.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands is noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the proposed draft variation to the
County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to the Proposed
Variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's
Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current variation process
and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should
be noted that submissions can only be considered if they relate to an element of the
Proposed Variation and any submission that does not relate to the Proposed
Variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Keaveney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-36 - BRIAN CURRAN
pg 44
Cllr. M. Regan left the meeting while this item was being discussed due to a
Conflict of Interest.
42
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission (Presumed Incomplete) entitled 'Mount Pleasant 31131
Submission on "Proposed Variation No 1 to the County Development Plan 2022 -
2028 December 20th, 2025" Re zone land outside settlement boundary'
This submission does not provide any details but includes the instruction to 'See
enclosed pdfs.' However, no files other than a map site outline to the east of
Loughrea town.
Chief Executive Response
While this submission is somewhat unclear, it may be the case that the site outline
is requesting a residential zoning. However, the lands in question do not form part
of the Proposed Variation to the County Development Plan. Only submissions that
relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken into account in the
preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls outside the
scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at this time. As
stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can only be
considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and any submission
that does not relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. P. Feeney, seconded by Cllr.
J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-37 - CYRIL J KELLY & ASSOCIATES ON BEHALF OF
BRIAN CURRAN & JOHN CURRAN
pg 44
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests the rezoning of land in Mount Pleasant, Loughrea, from
unzoned to Residential.
The submission makes the case for the reinstatement of residential zoning that
was removed during the 2024 Loughrea LAP Plan making process.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the zoning of lands for residential development is noted.
The zoning of the lands in question does not form part of the proposed draft variation
to the County Development Plan. However, Residential Phase 2 zoned lands in
Loughrea can now effectively come forward for development. Only submissions that
relate directly to the Proposed Variation may be taken into account in the preparation
of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the
current variation process and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the
Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can only be considered if they
43
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and any submission that does not
relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
L. Harney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-38 - BRIAN CURRAN & JOHN CURRAN
Pg 45
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission does not expressly request a rezoning. However, it appears that the
case is being made for unzoned lands to the west of Loughrea town to be zoned for
residential development. The submission advises that if the lands/property were
included in the SCA they would meet all the criteria for Tier 1 lands.
The request is framed as a response to the revised NPF.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted.
However, the zoning of these lands in question do not form part of the Proposed
Variation to the County Development Plan. Only submissions that relate directly to
the proposed draft variation may be taken into account in the preparation of the Chief
Executive's Report. As such, this request falls outside the scope of the current
variation process and cannot be considered at this time. As stated within the
Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can only be considered if they
relate to an element of the Proposed Variation.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
P. Killilea and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-41 - NOEL AND SHARON LALLY
pg 45
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission includes an expression of interest letter in relation to a zoning
request.
44
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
It seeks to zone 7.1 hectares (17.5 acres) of land at Kingsland, Athenry off the L3112,
as Residential Phase 1 on the L3112.
The submission provides a planning history of the lands in question and sets out a
case for the zoning of these lands.
Submission requests the inclusion of additional Guidelines within the Proposed
Variation to support the release of Residential Phase 2 lands for development within
the lifetime of the GCDP in order to align with the revised NPF. Submission requests
that the policy objectives that restrict the development of Residential Phase 2 lands,
including 'GCMA I Residential Development' in Section 1.10 of Volume 2 of the
GCDP and 'Residential Phase 2' in Section 1.7 of the Athenry LAP (and others
related to the Residential Phase 2 lands in the GCDP and in the Local Area Plans),
be amended to align with the intention of the Proposed Variation to allow all
Residential Phase 2 lands to be developed within the lifetime of the GCDP and
Athenry LAP.
Chief Executive Response
The submission requesting the rezoning of lands for residential development is
noted. The contents of the Expression of Interest letter are also noted.
However, the lands in question do not form part of the Proposed Variation to the
County Development Plan.
Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken
into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request
falls outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at
this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions
can only be considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and
any submission that does not relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered.
As part of Variation 1, Residential Phase 2 lands are available for development once
the Variation is complete. This principle applies to all Residential Phase 2 lands
across the County. Members of the public or others can seek additional advice and
clarity through the S.247 Preapplication advice service.
The proposed amendments to narrative and policy objectives in the Variation as
considered to be sufficient and in accordance with the Section 28 Guidelines.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
GI-W C200-2 - MARTIN LAVELLE
pg 46
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
45
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Item 1: Submission comments on a number of items including a perceived trend of
submissions on farm housing applications originating from owners of renewable
energy proposals, which will increase housing demand for towns and villages if such
farm housing is denied planning permission.
Item 2 The second item relates to Oranmore Railway station broadly, seeking to
develop the site according to historic plans, to include a multi-story car park, to
develop a pedestrian link to the Oranmore Industrial area, and to develop traffic
upgrades on the R466.
Item 3: Suggestion is to identify a possible location of a second street in Oughterard,
from the west bridge running parallel to the river, for the purposes of creating critical
mass in the Town.
Item 4: seeks 3 No. of Zoning changes:
1 . Milltown: Area around the Train Station to be zoned industrial.
Tuam: The medieval graveyard around St. Mary's Cathedral to lose
2.
its Town Centre zoning.
3. Oranmore: A site on the Maree Road to be zoned residential.
Chief Executive Response
The various topics in question in this observation do not form part of the Proposed
Variation to the County Development Plan. This Variation is limited to only consider
observations which directly relate to Variation 1 as advertised.
Only submissions that relate directly to the Proposed Variation may be taken into
account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
rhe CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. D. Killilea, seconded by Cllr.
M. Lee and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-7 - MARTIN LAVELLE
pg 47
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission advises that further to a previous submission it is asked that the
following issues be addressed also:
Realignment of the N84 Headford to Shrule road.
The submission expresses dissatisfaction at the quality of street lighting
along Main Street, Headford town.
Realignment of the Tinkershill junction with L6112 and N83 Dunmore to
Tuam.
46
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Widening & realignment of the L51516 Monument Road from Ballindooley
Cross to the Galway City Boundary.
Widening & realignment of the N67 road from Kinvara to the County Boundary
for pedestrians, cyclists & buses as the road are heavily trafficked from
tourists.
Development of a cantilevered footpath from Kinvara village to Dunguaire
Castle along the N67 with beach construction.
Proposed Yacht Marinas in Kinvara, Bearna, An Spideal, Roundstone,
Clifden, Kilronan & Leenane.
Improvements to road access to Silverstrand, Bearna.
• Completion of Loughrea Bypass road from R446/R349/R380 Roundabout to
R380 via Tullahill.
Pedestrianisation of Piggott's Street, Church Street, King Street, Kelly's
Street, Castle Street & Abbey Street to Dolphin Street in Loughrea Town.
Development of a mufti-story carpark at existing Loughrea Center Parking site
& include vehicular entrance/exit over Moat to Station Road.
Development of a new pedestrian Street from Loughrea Centre Parking site
to Abbey Street, south of the Moat.
Pedestrianisation of Burke's Lane and Northgate Street in Athenry.
Development of the area around St. Mary's Church in Athenry into a Town
Square. This will involve exhumation of bodies from graveyard and
reinterment elsewhere.
Completion of the carpark at R347/L3112 junction In Athenry.
For the council to acquire the Old Protestant Church in Kilronan to be
developed into a third level remote access library.
A proposed exemption of development management standards around
farming developments which generate small amounts of traffic in cul de sacs.
A number of technical and planning procedure suggestions around the
operation of Biogas projects.
A number of technical, planning procedure, and health and safety
suggestions around wind turbine projects.
Chief Executive Response
Submission noted.
However, the points raised do not form part of the Proposed Variation to the County
Development Plan. This report considers observations which relate to the stated
Variation No. 1 as per the newspaper advert.
Only submissions that relate directly to the Proposed Variation may be taken into
account in the preparation ofthe Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls
outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at this
time. As stated within the Variation notice, submissions can only be considered if
47
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
they relate to an element of the proposed variation and any submission that does
not relate to the proposed variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-20 - MKO ON BEHALF OF RONAN BARRETT OF
CASTLESTAR PROPERTY GROUP
Pg 48-52
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission can be summarised under the headings of Housing Needs Demand
Assessment, Density Standards, Settlement Capacity Audit, Residential Phase 2
lands and Site-Specific Policy.
Housing Needs Demand Assessment
The submission raises concerns that certain figures which have been calculated are
incorrect. The submission notes that the formula applied and presented in Table 39
applies a measure of met/unmet demand from the past 5 years which was already
accounted for in the NPF Total Projections. The submission further notes that the
ESRI projections identify a need for approximately 41 ,000 new dwellings per annum
until 2040 based solely on future population growth. The submission outlines what
the Guidelines estimate noting 55,000 dwellings pla up to 2034. This figure was used
for the basis of calculating figures for each Local Authority with Galway County
Council having a target of 2,008 units p/a from 2025 — 2034. The submission further
notes that subtracting unit completions between 2020-2025 from population growth
projections during 2025-2034 is incorrect. The submission considers that this results
in an underutilization of the NPF total projections
The submission also raises concerns in relation to the housing need calculations
used in the unvaried GCDP 2022—2028 and the original HNDA. The plan's total
housing allocation of 10,738 units was incorrectly divided over seven years instead
of the statutory six, producing an understated annual target of 1 ,534 units. National
Section 28 Guidelines have since corrected this to 1 , 790 units per year and outlines
issues with the approach taken in the HNDA. The submission notes that Proposed
Varied HNDA claims that 2,987 units were delivered between 2020—2025, however,
this level of delivery would not even satisfy the Core Strategy targets for 2023 and
2024.
The submission further notes the corrected annual allocation under the unvaried
GCDP exceeds the allocation produced by the Proposed Varied HNDA which the
submission notes as illogical. The submission notes that the Proposed Variation
appears to be based on the flawed assumption that NPF housing targets are surplus
to need in Galway while in reality, there is a shortfall.
Density
48
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission also raises concerns in relation to Table 15.1 of the GCDP and has
outlined that density is still too low and is not fully in accordance with the ranges set
out in the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact Settlements
Guidelines (2024). The submission outlines discrepancies between the proposed
table and the 2024 Guidelines and requests it to be addressed as well as the
associated text to ensure there is no ambiguity. The submission also outlines that
the density ranges for locations with subjective National Density Policy are too low.
The submission outlines reasons and guidance for increased density ranges and
requests this change. The submission further notes that Section 15.2.3 of the GCDP
states that "Chapter 2 Core Strategy, Settlement Strategy and Housing Strategy sets
the standard density at 35 Dwellings Per Hectare" but that this is not reflected in the
Core Strategy or anywhere in Chapter 2 and this creates uncertainty.
Finally, the submission requests the Local Authority to revise residential density
standards in both Chapter 2 and Chapter 15 of the County Development Plan to
reflect the requirements of national policy and where appropriate to apply subjective
density, a density of 35 Dwellings Per Hectare should be applied.
Settlement Capacity Audit
The proposed Settlement Capacity Audit (SCA) is welcome, but it is requested that
it should be undertaken for smaller towns and villages within the County. The
omission of smaller settlements, especially in West County Galway and the
Gaeltacht, undermines effective forward planning and prevents the identification of
critical infrastructure and land-supply constraints.
Residential Phase 2 Lands
The submission welcomes the renewed focus on Residential Phase 2 lands however
notes that for all levels outside the MASP there is a restrictive policy either in the
County Development Plan or the appropriate Local Area Plan which states
"c)Where it is apparent that Residential (Phasel) lands cannot or will not be
developed for residential purposes within the plan period, residential development
may be considered in limited cases in a phased manner on suitable Residential
(Phase2) lands, in exceptional circumstances; •Development on Residential
(Phase 2) lands will normally only be considered where 50% of the lands in
Residential (Phase 1) are committed to development."
The submission outlines this is inflexible and provides planning history from An
Coimisiün Pleanåla. The submission asks for the text in bold above to be struck out
from the CDP and where LAPS are relevant a new policy should be put forward that
explicitly identifies that exceptional circumstances have been reached, and the 50%
bar is no longer applicable due to the revised population targets in the NPF
The submission further notes that the SCA and the Policy Objectives regarding the
renewed approach for Residential Phase 2 lands have not been extended to small
growth towns and small growth villages and request that this policy be revisited so
these areas are not deprived of access to new housing.
Site Specific Policy
In this section the submission makes a rezoning request for lands in An Spideal Thiar
(Residential Phase 2 to Residential Phase 1) and outlines the site context and
planning history as well as the planning reasons. A housing layout and confirmation
49
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
of feasibility for connections is appended to the submission to support the proposed
rezoning. The submission also outlines issues with other RI sites coming forward in
the settlement.
The submission further requests rezoning of the lands at the Former Naomh Einde
Convent in An Spidéal, from Community Facilities to Village Centre. Again, the
submission outlines the context, history, infrastructure, and proposed internal layout
taken from a planning application for the lands. A letter of connection to the
Wastewater Treatment Plan is also provided in support.
The final rezoning request is for lands at Kylebroghlan, Maigh Cuilinn, and it is
requested to rezone Agricultural zoned lands to Residential Phase 1 lands. The
context and history of the site is outlined, and it is noted that the site is now an infill
site. Submission notes proposed plans are ready for the site, confirmation of
feasibility has been provided by Uisce Éireann and other services can be provided
via the constructed estate.
The conclusion of the submission reiterates the issues brought up by the submission
and finally reiterates the requests made within the submission.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission received are noted.
Housing Needs Demand Assessment
It is noted and acknowledged that the 'actual new housing supply' should not have
been included in Table 39 and as such, this is proposed to be removed from the
Housing Strategy and HNDA. Table 39 now only outlines the figures within the
published Section 28 Guidelines and ESRI methodology.
While Table 39 of the Housing Strategy and HNDA has now been updated to remove
the new housing supply, it is noted and emphasised that this has not had any
subsequent effect on the material or conclusion of the Housing Strategy and HNDA.
These updated figures are those available in the Section 28 Guidelines and ESRI
methodology with page 106 and Section 7.1 now updated to reflect this.
Noted.
The HNDA has been reviewed and give effect to the Section 28 Housing Growth
Requirements.
Density
In relation to the request for changes to densities, it is noted that the proposed new
table 15.1 does increase densities in certain settlements and site types.
Furthermore, Table 15.1 advises that all development proposals shall be assessed
having regard to the Density Table and the Guidelines which provide more flexibility
in relation to density ranges. While the submissions reference to section 15.2.3 is
noted, densities will be assessed against the core strategy as contained in Chapter
2, Table 15.1 and against the Guidelines which provide flexibility. It is further noted
that Chapter 15 of the County Development Plan provides for a degree of flexibility
at appropriate locations in relation to density where the quality of the proposal merits
a higher density.
50
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
There is a tiered density range in the Core Strategy Table ranging from 35 in the
Urban Framework Plan areas and Key Towns to 11 in the Small Growth Villages.
However, a degree of flexibility applies in this regard which permits flexibility with
respect to density at appropriate locations.
Settlement Capacity Audit
The request in relation to the SCA is noted. However, the Settlement Capacity Audit
has been carried out in accordance with the Section 28 Housing Growth
Requirements Guidelines. Information in relation to smaller settlements is available
and the Local Authority will assist with this information in any pre planning application
for a development. See Chief Executive Response to submission GL W-C200-40.
Residential Phase 2 Lands
In relation to the request to strike out the bold text in the County Development Plan
it is considered that the proposed Policy Objectives in the Proposed Variation are in
accordance with the goals of the Section 28 Guidelines and the proposed Policy
Objectives will consider the release of Residential Phase 2 lands to provide more
flexibility and more lands for development as well as supporting the provision of
housing on zoned land where appropriate and in accordance with proper planning
and sustainable development. It is considered that the Policy Objectives have been
amended with a view to supporting the provision of housing on zoned land in these
settlements where appropriate including Residential Phase 2 lands. Again, this
offers flexibility and releases lands for housing development in accordance with the
Section 28 Guidelines. The request for new objectives in the case of settlements
with LAPS is noted, however it is considered the Proposed Variation would facilitate
the development of housing on Residential Phase 2 lands within the LAP towns.
An amendment has been made to Policy Objectives SGT 1 and SGV 1 as part of
the Proposed Variation to facilitate appropriate development of housing on zoned
land where appropriate.
Part of this submission requests land zonings in An Spideal Thiar, An Spideal Village
Centre and Maigh Cuillin. However, the lands in question do not form part of the
proposed draft variation to the County Development Plan. In accordance with Only
submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken into
account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls
outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at this
time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can
only be considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and any
submission that does not relate to the proposed variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive Recommendation to submission GLW-C200-40.
Update Table 39 and narrative of HNDA as follows:
51
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Hous:ng Demand Estimation over the Plan per Sect'0h 28 Msnvterval
County Council
Annual Households
NPF scenark projected new
2008
houseWd demand to 2034
Total Households
1&072
8
Thas •ndtcates a difference of 456 no. units per annum when compared with the previous
method {which estimated a requirement of 1.543 additional units per
overall housing demand up to 2034 is expected to be 13,072 units, which equates to
ho sing units per annum. Studying the income profile of the county and calculating
2,C08 u
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. A. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
T. Welby and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-1 - COMMUNITY CAMPAIGNER DAVID BARTON
Pg 53-55
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission relates to the built heritage of Galway County Council, specifically
with the intention to champion key stakeholders with a view to supporting their
economic growth through the merits of High-Quality style Conservation. The
submission also hopes to support wider constructive and restorative support of Built
Heritage through positive and constructive working. This submission is supported by
an extensive appendix of best-practice documents and Guidelines. The submission
is split into the following sections:
Design Codes:
52
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16tn February 2026
The submission makes a wide range of suggestions under this topic, encouraging
the adoption of design codes, for Local Authorities to engage with key consultation
groups, the creation of volunteer labouring assemblies, and to streamline the
planning process for groups that are working to preserve historic buildings. There
are also a number of procedural suggestions. The submission also suggests on how
better to conduct public consultation and the monitoring of demolition activity around
historic buildings.
Designated & Non-Designated Heritage Assets:
Here the submission calls for the enhancement of historic areas through funds and
investment, pooling of historic items, and to create financial incentives to develop
these historic areas in a sympatric way.
Conservation Area
The submission argues for a simplified process for alterations to protected buildings,
more incentives for development of protected buildings, for a relaxing of using
modern imitation materials, and tighter design consistency within ACAs. There are
also suggestions for establishment for a directory of TVA approved architects and
for the establishment of new ACAs.
Climate Change
The submission states the importance of retrofitting, to ensure embodied energy and
carbon must remain a central priority to influence new construction techniques, and
to create an approved contractor directory for contractors who work with sustainable
materials. Also requests steps to maximize biodiversity gain, to ensure there is
adequate flooding defences, and to create a fund to decommission of glass towers.
Historic Buildings
In this section, the submission suggests the adoption of a number of policies, design
suggestions, and funds so as to protect and maintain historic buildings. Including a
scheme to reconstruct long lost buildings of historic value. There is also a suggestion
that Local Authorities should work in close conjunction with foundries to produce raw
materials for such developments.
Traditional Vernacular Architecture
Building on suggestions in previous sections of this submission, this section
suggests the inclusion of smart buildings methods when working on historic
buildings, to simplify the process of protecting a building, and to provide specialist
training programmes. There is also a suggestion that new housing estates should
adopt historical layouts i.e. Georgian, Victorian, or Edwardian layouts.
Making an application
This section begins with the suggestion of creating a list of bad actors who have
repeatedly harmed civic heritage, including new enforcement penalties for people
who allow their civic heritage properties fall into disrepair, and to create an action
plan to deter organisations and people from demolition of historic buildings. There is
also a number of suggestions on how to better conduct public consultation and public
engagement.
Miscellaneous
53
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
To finish the submission, there are a number of miscellaneous suggestions around
parking, historic street furniture, infrastructure provision and audit, and further stake
holder engagement improvement.
Chief Executive Response
The issues raised in the submission are noted.
However, the various topics in question in this observation do not form part of the
Proposed Variation to the County Development Plan. This Variation is limited to only
consider observations which directly relate to the review and update of the existing
Housing Strategy and Housing Need and Demand Assessment of the Galway
County Development Plan with associated updates to the County Development
Plan, the proposed updates to existing Policy Objectives and narrative in the County
Development Plan which will place a renewed focus on Residential Phase 2 lands
in the County, and the Rectification of Land use Zoning Map for Oranmore.
Only submissions that relate directly to the Proposed Variation may be taken into
account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request falls
outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at this
time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions can
only be considered if they relate to an element of the Proposed Variation and any
submission that does not relate to the Proposed Variation will not be considered.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. M. Hoade, seconded by Cllr.
T. Welby and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-3 - JOE SHERIDAN
Pg 55-56
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Part A. 1
The submission begins with seeking to change small settlement building caps to be
based on infrastructure, rather than population. The submission further states that it
should be reflected in the capable density allowed within these statements to reflect
the current need for housing. Submission references Milltown which, it is stated has
a non utilised effluent plant capacity of 500 pe, potable water, road capacity and bus
routes with viable train halt placement in 5 years.
Submission seeks to increase 'house cap' from 8 to 40 to take up slack of house non
delivery by larger settlements and towns.
Part A. 2
you lose h of it"
This submission also suggests a system under a "Don't use it .
philosophy where any higher tier settlements which fail to deliver their housing core
strategy allocation, the 50% of the shortfall in figures is added to the overall
54
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
development cap of lower tier settlements. This would enable greater use of under-
utilised infrastructure in these small settlements.
Part cl
Reference made to Oranmore, and zoning changes needed that highlights the
slightly flawed county wide aspects to non domestic zonal or legacy allowable zone
allocations for industrial and commercial areas in Galway County and the present
CDP
Submission seeks an adjunct to the Rural Green Industry exemption for rural
industry to include 'and already brown field legacy serviced sites'. Milltown Business
Park is referenced as an example and the case is made for its expansion.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. A holistic view of towns for zoning is taken
rather than merely infrastructure. In the case of Milltown, policy objective SS7 applies
which allows for consideration of development on the basis of connectivity, capacity,
Core Strategy Compliance, Settlement Hierarchy, good design, community gain and
proper planning and sustainable development. This is considered appropriate and
sufficient in this instance.
Variation No. 1 allows for a greater degree of flexibility with respect to Residential
Phase 2 zoned lands.
Noted. The Planning Authority update zoning during plan reviews as necessary.
Submission comments in relation to Milltown Business Park and legacy zoning are
noted, however fall outside the scope of the Variation.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. S. Cunniffe, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-9 - BROCK MCCLURE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
CONSULTS ON BEHALF OF SATHEL LTD
Pg 56-57
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Submission relates to a parcel of land in Tuam. It requests the publication of a
revised Core Strategy to understand how the baseline housing allocation figures or
additional 50% headroom figures will be allocated per settlement. They seek that the
Planning Authority consider their position to ensure that the development of Key
Towns is done in a planned and integrated manner, with a focus on Tuam.
The submission gives an outline of a site in Tuam. The site is predominantly zoned
Residential Phase 1, with a portion of the site zoned Open Space with a Constrained
Land Use.
55
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Density
The submission raises concern with the proposed densities, and the amendment to
Table 15.1, 'Residential Density', as the changes affects their client's site in Tuam.
The submission considers that the 25 — 30 units density range within the variation
for Urban Extension locations within Key Towns does not align with the Sustainable
Residential Development and Compact Settlements Guidelines for Planning
Authorities 2024, which gives a density range for such a location for 30 — 50 dph.
The submission notes that alignment with a higher range would ensure adherence
with Policy Objective 3.1 of the Settlement Guidelines. It is requested that the density
ranges are reviewed to reflect the Sustainable Residential Development and
Compact Settlement Guidelines.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
Noted. These lands do not fall within the scope of this Proposed Variation.
The Tuam Local Area Plan 2023 — 2029 gives a density of 35 dwellings per hectare.
Chapter 15 of the County Development Plan provides for a degree of flexibility at
appropriate locations in relation to density where the quality of the proposal merits a
higher density. The density ranges are considered appropriate. In addition, Table
15.1 advises that all development proposals shall be assessed having regard to the
Density Table and the Guidelines which provide more flexibility in relation to density
ranges.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. C. Keane and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-10
BROCK MCCLURE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT CONSULTS ON BEHALF OF CLADDAGH
VENTURES LTD
Pg 57-58
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission includes an outline of the former Haydens Hotel site in Ballinalsoe,
highlighting its Town Centre zoning and its Opportunity Site status in the Ballinasloe
LAP.
Density
The first issue of this submission relates specifically to Section 3 of the Variation
Document Publication, and the amendment to Table 15.1, 'Residential Density', as
the changes affects their client's site in Ballinasloe. The submission notes that 35
or Site Specific dph density range within the Variation for Centre and Urban
56
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Neighbourhood locations within Key Towns does not align with the Sustainable
Residential Development and Compact Settlements Guidelines for Planning
Authorities 2024, which gives a density range for such a location for 40 — 100 dph.
The submission notes that a higher range would ensure alignment with Policy
Objective 3.1 of the Settlement Guidelines. Submission requests increasing the
density range to align to the Guidelines.
Core Strategy
The submission makes note that the current draft Variation published has not
included a revised core strategy, and they make note it is not currently clear how the
baseline housing allocation figures or additional 50% headroom figures will be
allocated per settlement. They seek that the Planning Authority consider their
position on matter to ensure that the development of Key Towns is done in a planned
and integrated manner, with a focus on Ballinasloe.
Chief Executive Response
The Ballinasloe Local Area Plan 2022 —2028 sets a density of 35 dwellings per
hectare. Chapter 15 of the County Development Plan provides for a degree of
flexibility at appropriate locations in relation to density where the quality of the
proposal merits a higher density. The density ranges are considered appropriate.
In addition, Table 15.1 advises that all development proposals shall be assessed
having regard to the Density Table and the Guidelines which provide more
flexibility in relation to density ranges.
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Recommendation to GLW-C200-40
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-11 - THE PLANNING PARTNERSHIP ON BEHALF OF
ELEANOR SHERIDAN
Pg 58-63
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission directly relates to c. 1.12 hectares of land in Milltown, currently in a
mixture of agricultural use (with a live planning permission for four dwellings). The
submission wishes to develop this land, and thus requests that the final Variation
adequately reflect the existing and future land use context of these lands, and the
role of Milltown as a whole, specifically that level 7 settlements such as Milltown be
appropriately recognised in the Core and Settlement strategies. The submission
outlines the key planning facts of the site, the site's location and description, and the
Site history. The submission also outlines the merits of this site for further residential
development. To build the argument for this site's suitability, the submission makes
a number of notes and critiques of the proposed variation, which are outlined below:
Purpose of the Variation:
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
In this section of the submission, the following is noted:
"The reason for the Proposed Variation No. 1 is in response to 'The National
Planning Framework's First Revision 2025' and the 'Section 28 Guidelines on NPF
Implementation — Housing Growth Requirements' .
However, in the opinion of the submission, the Proposed Variation is not consistent
with either statement. The submission argues that the Proposed Variation is not
consistent to National Policy Objectives 1 1 and 48 (for clarity, the submission seems
to be referring to Objective 47) as outlined in the First Revision of the National
Planning Framework.
The submission also claims the Proposed Variation contravenes Policy and
Objective 1 and 2 of the Section 28 NPF Implementation: Housing Growth
Requirements.
As succinctly summarised in the submission, the submission claims that the
Proposed Variation plans for a three-year period, with no headroom allowance,
whereas it should be planning for a fifteen year period, with a substantial headroom
allowance. The omission of these elements impact the ability of the core strategy to
fulfil its function.
Elements of the proposed Variation, and issues arising:
Issue with proposed Variation Part A, as outlined in the submission:
The Housing Strategy and Housing Need and Demand Assessment
does not project to 2038 as required by the Guidelines,
The Housing Strategy and Housing Need and Demand Assessment
does not acknowledge the likelihood of an extension to the current County
Development Plan past 2028,
The Housing Strategy and Housing Need and Demand Assessment
does not review, and adapt to, the failure to date of the core and settlement
strategy to deliver its targets,
The Housing Strategy and Housing Need and Demand Assessment
does not acknowledge the Housing Delivery Action Plan 2022-2026,
The associated updates to the County Development Plan as seen in
the proposed Variation does not consider the functioning of the settlement
hierarchy and the role of smaller settlements, such as Milltown;
The associated updates to the County Development Plan as seen in
the Proposed Variation does not consider national policy which promotes the
delivery of housing in village settings.
Issue with proposed Variation Part B, as outlined in the submission:
Core Strategy Table 2.11 has not been updated to meet the
requirements of The National Planning Framework's First Revision or the
Guidelines.
58
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
No provision for headroom is made,
Residential Density Table 15.1 has not been updated to reflect the
function of Rural Settlements,
Policy CS 5 Population within Tiers has not been addressed, albeit
the halfway point has passed,
The role of Rural Settlements in delivering on the requirements of the
Guidelines does not appear to have been considered,
The Proposed Variation considers the volume of zoned land but not
the deliverability of zoned land, and monitoring outcomes are not apparent.
Amendments of the proposed Variation sought:
That the Proposed Variation recognises that the current core and
settlement strategy is not working, and make further amendments accordingly,
The results of the monitoring should be demonstrated and acted on
accordingly,
The Proposed Variation should enact the halfway clause of by Policy
CS 5 Population,
There is a lack of evidence to show activating Residential Phase 2
lands is an effective approach to reach targets,
The Variation should broaden the scope of settlements which can
contribute to the targets to includes villages,
There is no evidence of the review of the Housing Need and Demand
Study informing any change in approach. The Proposed Variation should be
amended to rectify this,
Page 8 of the Proposed Variation references that "It is considered that
this approach will be applied to all serviced, zoned settlements across the
County", the word zoned should be omitted and replaced with 'zoned (or within
CSO boundaries of)' ,
That the Proposed Variation recognise that not all rural settlement
housing needs are for large, detached houses, but also smaller units for smaller
households and or 'rightsizing',
The Proposed Variation should clarify and align the Table 15.1 density
Guidelines with the Compact Settlement Guidelines,
Align the Proposed Variation and the County Development Plan with
the Council's Housing Delivery Action Plan 2022-2026,
59
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Elevate Milltown from Level 7, or change Level 7 to a different
classification, such that there is a clarity that Milltown and similar settlements are
capable of, and clarify which developments are suitable for Level 7 settlements,
Establish a development envelope for Level 7 Settlements (by
reference to CSO settlement boundary pending individual zoning plan), subject to
a case-by-case basis,
Policy Objectives Settlement Hierarchy SS7 should be amended as
follows:
SS7 Development of Rural Settlements and Rural Nodes (Level 7)
In the case of smaller settlements for which no specific plans are available,
development shall be considered on the basis of its connectivity, capacity (including
social, cultural, and economic, infrastructural and environmental capacity), good
design and community gain. The Planning Authority will support the provision of
housing (for various household types, including providing older / rightsizing housing
opportunities) on land within the CSO boundaries of Rural Settlements where
appropriate in accordance with proper planning and sustainable development, and
national planning policy including the National Planning Framework and Compact
Settlement Guidelines."
Housing Context
Also in this submission is a section on the overall context of housing within Galway
County. This section outlines the new and old annual figures and how Galway is
doing in achieving it's targets so far, noting the under provision of housing units and
the large quantity of one-off rural housing units granted. The submission takes issue
with the overprovision of one-off rural housing. The submission states that the
Proposed Variation is not radical or at scale, despite the need for such action and
the clear Government policy set out in the Guidelines which are exceptional and
radical. The submission also seeks to look beyond just the Settlement Capacity Audit
to establish the availability of suitable land for development, following the provisions
as set out in the Guidelines. The submission finally claims that smaller settlements
have been overlooked in favour of larger settlements for housing provision, and this
should be reevaluated.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted.
The provisions of Policy Objective SS7 apply to Level 7 settlements such as Milltown
whereby development shall be considered on the basis of connectivity, capacity and
compliance with the Core Strategy and Settlement Hierarchy. This wording is
considered appropriate. Variation 1 is in relation to the current Development Plan
2022-2028. The revised Housing Strategy and HNDA projects up to 2034 which is
for the remaining period of the Development Plan plus a further 6 years.
No CDP extension is proposed.
The purpose of the Housing Strategy and HNDA is to outline the updated Census
figures, present the facts of the emerging housing trends and statistics since 2022,
to then project the figures up to 2034. The new HNDA underpins the revised housing
60
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
allocation as per the Section 28 Guidelines. Development will still be in accordance
with the Core Strategy. See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40 with
respect to the core strategy.
Sufficient zoned lands to accommodate housing across County Galway have been
identified to satisfy revised housing requirements.
The Planning Authority supports the provision of sustainable residential
development in the zoned and serviced settlements across the County. Variation 1
applies to all zoned settlements across the County. The density ranges are
considered appropriate, and these ranges offer a degree of flexibility.
The HNDA will be updated to include reference to the Housing Delivery Action Plan.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Recommendation to GLW-C200-40 on the core strategy.
The HDNA will be updated to include reference to the Housing Delivery Action Plan
as below:
61
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
2 3 5 Action (HDAPJ 2022•2026
h•.he' in 2022_ •ang w': •ee •n
AN. • •.o de•r deliver".
The FDA? •ntendee e:
be uved t:
np'e oee• tee pla• pen* •voeun6 na•.ion'l
:olicy gromh wt•e bey
outnt
r e' :rat zoa.' amd
be 'dv•nced *
{LA 'Qile , Omi ei priv.:e de.•ekpe••._ &
aer ew and Part V teqvre•renz •nd
'elh•e,-,• Bp$rv.ed heu•.ag is
Furdte•.el,
•Se Ccuxd "em tee ; rwcion Cue Rent". and
side e e an: tre Hate Seeme 'form erfy
the 'rel•n' Home
e eeo'lrrn; 1 727 fee the 2022—2026.
wttS • 04 deb•err• •ne Appt'.•ed
•.in; deh•ery. The tee Govemment at tpe tre th•e
delwe-,' woute ee spot c Ate.
the ret.v•1S fee eehveN„ T e *OAF
Of 226 home; Over tse
A 'f ADAP t: ms:cFuN t: ree: ho':ins eem•ad
the wetshtee tow-are: teed •n'
2•Sed Pi•n
need', for elde• persons. xo;ie wth in: other
•z delye—r•
•:entrfe; 'e ri;•-: •nd cen:esint: 2h3t "ect
•ee 'n: led. t: deaert
the •em-red
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. A. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
M. Lee and agreed by the Members.
- NORTHEAST
GLW C200-13
PROTECTION CLG
Pg 65-69
GALWAY
ENVIRONMENTAL
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission requests that the area of the proposed Clonberne wind farm and
other areas in North and East Galway are changed from 'open to consideration' to
'not normally permissible' in the Local Authority Renewable Energy Strategy with
respect to wind energy development. The submission also believes that the region
in a line from Abbeyknockmoy to Mountbellew to Ballyforan should be designated
62
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
by the Local Authority as Vulnerable Landscape given its unique Annex If habitats
and environmental characteristics. The submission also seeks that North-East
Galway be changed from an area of low sensitivity to an area of high vulnerability.
The submission seeks to amend Appendix 4, to update the Landscape Character
Assessment to a characterisation more appropriate for such a sensitive wetland area
of high biodiversity value and for the insertion and mention of Turloughs in the
Landscape Character Units, 5b Castlegar Basin, 5c Springfield Basin and 5e
Northern River Clare Basin as per page 20 of Appendix 4.
The submission goes on to give an extensive listing of International, national, and
local legal acts and policy documents relevant to the above area.
International
In this section the submission outlines the Nature Restoration Law 2024 and the
subsequent legal requirements on member states. It goes on to demonstrate how
various decisions reached by the EU are designed to protect the environment, with
a focus on the precautionary principle. Outlined is the aim for a high level of
protection and promotion of the prevention principle. Finally, this section outlines the
primary objectives of the Habitats directive, Ireland's compulsion to comply, and a
number of CJEU rulings which have found that Ireland has failed to meet some of its
obligations.
National
The submission goes on to name a number of relevant acts and policies for
conservation of nature and how they relate to the above.
Local
In this section the ecological sensitivity as outlined in the SEA Environmental Report
for the Development Plan 2022 — 2028 are noted for Peatlands, Fens, Turloughs,
and Cutover Bogs.
Turloughs
The submission outlines the essence of Turloughs, their relation to karst landscapes,
and how they work hydrologically. Emphasis is placed on the unique nature of
Turloughs in Ireland and their designation as a priority habitat under the EU Habitat
Directive and their current conservation status as unfavourable. This section goes
on to note the importance of the wider hydrological network supplying the Turloughs
and issues around drainage. The following paragraphs reiterate the uniqueness of
Turloughs in Ireland. The following paragraphs outline the conservation status of the
Whooper Swans, and evidence of their high numbers around the Turloughs, and
how the Turloughs are ecologically important to the life cycle of the Whooper Swans.
The submission notes that particular features of wind turbines could be problematic,
taking into account the dangers which they may represent for birds.
A specific request is asked of the Local Authority to assess the number of Whooper
Swans nesting in the North-East Galway area.
This section goes to note the National Landscape Strategy and its core objective of
protection and management of the landscape. It outlines how Inland Wetlands have
declined between 2000 and 2018, and the obligations of the Council to protect the
landscape.
63
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Bogs
This section of the submission relates to Boglands, again listing a host of EU
Directives, legal cases, and policies which place legal protections on serval types of
bog land (Active Raised, Degraded Raised, Blanket, Transition Mires, and Quaking
Bogs). Specific notice is given to Ireland's breach of Article 6(1) due to failure of
conservation of a large number of bog sites.
Implications for Renewable Energy Developments
The submission argues that bogland is not a suitable place for wind turbine
developments, as the presence of these Annex I bog habitats in an area, whether
they are officially designated as SACs or not, presents a fundamental conflict with
the purpose of a large-scale industrial development. Their argument is that the
previously outlined legal framework exists to prevent the potential environmental
damage that such a project would cause. The submissions lists the following
potential negative impacts:
Carbon release from peat disturbance,
Hydrological damage from construction,
Wind Farm Wake effect the potential for localised drying,
Habitat and Biodiversity loss.
A request for a rigorous and detailed environmental assessment for development on
peatlands is requested. Overall, the submission believes the policy of placing
renewable energy projects on peatlands because they are seen as "unproductive"
land is misguided. Their preservation and restoration should be prioritized and that
there can be no reasonable scientific doubt as to the lack of adverse effects on the
integrity of these priority habitats if windfarm developments are allowed to go ahead.
High Concentration of Protected Sites
A number of maps are included to support this submission, indicating the high
concentration of protected sites.
Impacts on Birds
The submission notes the amount of Special Protection Areas in the area and the
inhabitant birds, such as Golden Plover, and the potential of wind turbine impacts on
such birds.
Risks to Hydrology and Peatlands
The risk to the local hydrology and peatlands is reiterated in this section of the
submission.
Other Environmental Risks
Other risks are noted such as carbon release, habitat fragmentation, and geological
vulnerability.
Conclusions
Ultimately the submission considers that that the area of North-East Galway and
South Roscommon meets the criteria under Article 15c (ii), and thus allowing
64
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
renewable energy projects in this area would seriously compromise the ecological
characteristics of the turloughs, bogs and karst landscape. The submission notes
that CJEU has recognized that Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive has a wide spatial
scope, which is not limited to the actual geographical area of the plan or location of
the project concerned, and based on the above evidence it is believed by North East
Galway Environmental Protection that Northeast Galway and South Roscommon
require strict protection for areas of very high biodiversity and climate value.
References and maps are included in the submission.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted.
However, the various topics in question in this observation do not form part of the
proposed draft variation to the County Development Plan. The Renewable Area
Strategy and the Landscape Character Assessment does not form part of this draft
variation. This draft variation is limited to only consider observations which directly
relate to the review and update of the existing Housing Strategy and Housing Need
and Demand Assessment of the Galway County Development Plan with associated
updates to the County Development Plan, the proposed updates to existing Policy
Objectives and narrative in the County Development Plan which will place a renewed
focus on Residential Phase 2 lands in the County, and the Rectification of Land use
Zoning Map for Oranmore.
Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken
into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report. As such, this request
falls outside the scope of the current variation process and cannot be considered at
this time. As stated within the Variation notice, it should be noted that submissions
can only be considered if they relate to an element of the proposed variation and any
submission that does not relate to the proposed variation will not be considered.
The request for a Whooping Bird survey is noted, however this would not be within
the scope of this variation. The appropriate statutory environmental assessments
were carried out during the preparation of the 2022-2028 Galway County Council
Development Plan process, likewise the appropriate statutory environmental
assessments are being carried out as part of this variation process. Any further
statutory plan making process or statutory plan review process would include similar
appropriate environmental assessments. The LARES and LCA will be reviewed as
part of the Galway County Development Plan review, which at this stage is expected
to commence in June.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. A. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
T. Welby and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-15 - MKO ON BEHALF OF THE O'DONNACHA FAMILY
pg 69
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
65
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Settlement Capacity Audit and Area Based Transport Assessment
This submission relates to lands at Briarhill (RI b and R2a) and seeks clarification on
the status of the lands in the context of the SCA and the forthcoming Area Based
Transport Assessment (ABTA). Submission notes that site RI b are considered Tier
I in terms of infrastructure capacity. Submission considers that a planning
application on lands Rlb would be welcomed by the Planning Authority. Clarity is
requested on the potential of a planning application on lands Rlb in the context of
the ABTA. Submission also queries phasing at Briarhill under policy objective BUFP
11 Phasing of the Development. Submission suggests that the SCA indicates that
RI b are sufficiently serviced by existing infrastructure and a planning application for
these lands would be timely, despite the continued absence of the ABTA.
Residential Zoned Land Tax
Submission notes that lands Rlb have been included on the RZLT map. Clarity is
sought on the inclusion of these lands for RZLT in the context of the ABTA. It is
further stated that if development of the lands is premature in the absence of the
ABTA, the lands should not be included on the RZLT map.
Submission requests an update on the ABTA.
Clarity is sought around the effects of Objectives GCMA 24 and BUFP 11 and how
they interact with the Settlement Capacity Audit, and the resultant effect on these
land holdings.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. The SCA indicates that infrastructure is
present for the referenced sites at Briarhill. However, an ABTA must be carried out
to facilitate the sustainable development of these lands in a coherent manner. While
the RZLT falls outside the scope of Variation 1. It appears that lands RI b would meet
all of the criteria for inclusion on the RZLT map.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-18 - MKO ON BEHALF OF JAMES COSTELLO
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
Settlement Capacity Audit and Area Based Transport Assessment
This submission relates to lands at Briarhill (Rla and R2a). Submsision notes that
lands Rlb are considered Tier 1 in terms of infrastructure capacity.
Submission then states that a planning application on lands RI a would be welcomed
by the Planning Authority. Clarity is requested on the potential of a planning
application on the lands Rla in the context of the ABTA. It is further stated that the
UFP for Briarhill indicates that development in the area will be phased in alignment
66
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
with the provision of infrastructure and connectivity and sets it in the context of the
publication of the ABTA as per GCMA 24 and GCMA 11. Submission considers that
the SCA would indicate that Rla are sufficiently serviced by existing infrastructure
and that a planning application for these lands would be timely, despite the ABTA
absence.
Residential Zoned Land Tax
RI a submission notes that these lands have been included in the RZLT map. Clarity
is sought on the inclusion of these lands in the context of the ABTA. It is submitted
that if development of the lands is premature in the absence of the ABTA, the lands
should not be included on the RZLT map.
In summary, an ABTA update is requested. It is stated that lands Rlb are
appropriately serviced based on the SCA. Clarity is sought on how the SCA relates
to policy objectives GCMA 24 and BUFP 1.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. The SCA indicates that infrastructure is
present for the referenced sites at Briarhill. However, an ABTA must be carried out
to facilitate the sustainable development of these lands in a coherent manner. While
the RZLT falls outside the scope of Variation No.l. It appears that lands Rla would
meet all of the criteria for inclusion on the RZLT map.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. J. McClearn and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-22 - GALWAY AIRPORT AVIATION BUSINESS CENTRE
ACTION GROUP
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The following is a summary of the submission from the Galway Airport Aviation
Business Centre Action Group submitted under the Proposed Variation No. 1 of the
Galway County Development Plan 2022-2028.
This submission advocates for the retention of the runway at the Galway Airport site
for aviation purposes. The group argues that the airport is a vital piece of strategic
infrastructure that should be reopened as an aviation business centre rather than a
commercial public transport hub. The primary goal is to enhance Galway's economic
resilience, competitiveness, and connectivity to support high-value industries like
medical devices, ICT, and advanced manufacturing.
The Key Points of the submission are as follows:
Strategic Aviation Asset: The group maintains that the existing runway is a strategic
asset that, if lost, can never be recovered. The action group feel the runway should
be safeguarded to provide direct air access for private and business travel.
67
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Economic Competitiveness: Retaining the airport is seen as essential for keeping
existing major employers in Galway and attracting new foreign direct investment
(FDI), as proximity to an airport is a critical factor for multinational firms.
Business Efficiency: A local airport would convert "all-day travel burdens" into half-
day or same-day journeys, significantly improving productivity for "executives, clients
and engineers" who currently rely on road access to distant airports.
Future Innovation: The submission highlights emerging opportunities in the aviation
ecosystem, such as drone-enabled logistics, unmanned aerial systems, and future
electric aircraft to service offshore windfarms.
Policy Alignment: Reopening the airport is stated to align with national goals for
balanced regional development and the expansion of the Atlantic Economic
Corridor.
Strong Public Support: The group notes significant public interest, citing an online
petition to "Reopen Carnmore Airport" that has gathered over 2,110 signatures
without formal promotion.
Strategic over Financial Value: The conclusion emphasises that the case for the
airport is "fundamentally strategic rather than purely financial," aimed at ensuring
Galway remains a national and international centre for high-value employment.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. The Action Group should refer to Chapter
5 Economic, Enterprise and Retail Development which includes a Vision Document
for the Former Galway Airport site. The contents of this submission fall outside the
scope of Variation No.l .
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. J. McClearn, seconded by Cllr.
K. McHugh Farag and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-31 - DAVID MULCAHY PLANNING CONSULTANTS LTD
ON BEHALF OF OAKWAY HOMES
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission welcomes the Variation's proposal to facilitate development on
Residential Phase 2 lands. It seeks to amend Variation wording in Volume No.2 to
align better with the text in Volume 1 regarding lands zoned Residential Phase 2.
The submission relates to two land holdings referred to as (Site 1 west and Site 2
east) in Bearna both primarily zoned Residential Phase 2 save for a portion of the
site to the east which also has an Existing Residential zoning. The submission sets
out the context, description and current zoning of the sites (the submission appears
68
Minutes of Speciat Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
to interchange references Site 1 west and Site 2 east). The submission further
outlines some of the text included in the Proposed Variation and includes the SCA
table for Bearna.
The submission suggests changes to remove perceived restrictions associated with
Residential Phase 2 lands. Changes are suggested to Volume 2, S 1.10 to ensure
consistency with text in volume 1 . The submission requests the amendment of Policy
Objective GCMA I Residential Development as follows:
a) Support the development of lands designated as Residential (Phase 1) within the
lifetime of the County Development Plan, subject to normal planning, access and
servicing requirements, and consider planning application for residential
development on appropriate Fesewe-the lands designated as Residential (Phase 2)
b) Support the provision of housing on zoned land in the Metropolitan area where
appropriate in accordance with proper planning and sustainable development
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted.
In relation to the changes proposed to Policy Objective GCMA 1 Residential
Development in the submission, it is considered that the proposed amendments to
policy objective GCMA 1 as part of the Proposed Variation are in accordance with
the goals and aspirations of the Section 28 Guidelines. It is considered that the
updated relevant Policy Objectives throughout the CDP will allow the appropriate
release of Residential Phase 2 lands. This will provide more flexibility and potentially
more lands for housing delivery across the County. The Variation as set out will
support the provision of housing on zoned land where appropriate and in accordance
with proper planning and sustainable development. It is considered that the relevant
Policy Objectives and supporting narrative have been amended appropriately and
69
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
sufficiently with a view to supporting the provision of housing on zoned tand across
the County. Again, this offers flexibility and releases lands for housing development
in accordance with the Section 28 Guidelines.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
In relation to the next 3 submissions — GLW C200 33; GLW C200 34 & GLW C200
35, Ms. Loughnane noted that they were the same submissions but related to
different areas. She further advised that all three submissions had been discussed
in detail during the Workshop held on 06/02/2026.
Cllr. P. Feeney noted the issue of sequential growth and stated that RI lands took
precedence over R2 for development. He then enquired whether development of
R2 lands would therefore be non-sequential, and thus whether An Coimisiün
Pleanéla would use this as an argument to prevent development. He stated that it
would be unacceptable to have this line of argument used by frequent submitters to
delay or prevent developments or used as the basis of a Judicial Review to do same.
Ms. Loughnane advised that one of the affected applicants attended the In-Person
consultation event held in December 2025. She noted that these lands would have
gone through SEA process in CDP already and OPR had seen, and were aware of
the lands, and so this should give prospective developments a degree of assurance
should an application be made. She advised that Galway County Council would
make a supporting submission to ACP where appropriate. She advised that for such
a submission, it would need to clearly enshrine the intentions of the Elected
Members. She then added that specific policy objectives in the CDP have been
amended for the five Local Area Plans, and that these plans were set to be
subsumed into the next County Development Plan.
GI-W C200-33 - ENVIROPLAN CONSULTING LTD ON BEHALF OF
LIMEHILL ESKER CLAREGALWAY LTD
Pg 74-77
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission relates to Residential Phase 2 lands in Tuam and Ballinasloe and
welcomes the renewed focus on Residential Phase 2 lands. However, the
submission raises concerns that certain provisions remaining in the County Plan and
the Proposed Variation could frustrate planning applications on residential phase 2
lands if not changed. The submissions raise concern with the use of the word
sequential and notes that it can be assumed that lands zoned residential phase 2
lands are locationally acceptable. The submission requests that the term 'sequential
growth' be omitted from the Proposed Variation.
70
Minutes of Special Council Meeting heid on 16th February 2026
Submission also requests that the wording of the proposed Variation should be
amended so that the term 'sequential' is replaced with 'consolidated'. It is requested
that this change is carried out in:
Section 2.4.4 entitled 'Future Settlement Growth", change "sequential
growth "to "consolidated growth",
Section 2.4.5 entitled "MASP", change "sequential manner 'to
"consolidated manner".
The submission raises concern that policy objectives that restrict Residential
Phase 2 lands will remain as part of the proposed variation. Submission advises
that if it is the intention of the Planning Authority to treat Residential Phase 2 lands
as Residential Phase 1 then Policy Objectives such as GCMA 1, BUFP 21, GUFP
1, SGTI and SGV 1 would need to be revised. Submission provides suggested
text changes.
OCMA
Re•Fdentjal
Development
GCUA
Gaiwaf Ctty
BUFP
Resldenüd
Development
BUFP enarhdl Urban
nan
Re•identia)
Development
GUFP
Garraun Urban
Frannork Han
the devekvmnt of jmds 9s ReSdentigj (hase
Residenöaf (Phaso 2) *itNn 6fet&ne of the Aan, su9d to
rumäl wannirw. occoss req.krarwis The types ot
develom:ent may also be ResZen5at (Chase 2)
1 Single fcy farrO members 'ands
2. NM49Gdentiäl devabmwr*s that aro to the cmtext any
residential anerity the existif" pattern deve,Wnent in tho area
A" devebpments w" be to Cae Strategy in the
County Agn, the Afcy tws MetropoåtM PIM the
of gust*nawe dovebmnent and to meeting
plannng. access reqeirerr*Ns Dovetwnents WiB be
win the future use of the the uv-tenn gronth
needs Ot na
b) $ugwt the of in the aea
Suw»ott tho Of deggna•ed 83 t)
ReSdon5aI (Ph9$0 2) withn the the Canty suWect to
g*gnning. access senidng The typos ot
devekpnent may be consa&ed 2) lands.
f Sir* members farniö' owned 'ends
2 Nm4V$identia' that ate appwiato to tho site context, any
existiry resJdenti91 amenty existiry parem 01 devekwnent in the area
Al' be subßc.t to cm•piarte mth the Strategy In the
Devebprrent Ran O*dives in the Urban Frarnewwk Ran
man {he Of sustanab,t deve!wnent to
meeting rumal access senidng requirements w;'
be pemtted it not the future u'e 01 the ;ams Over-tenn
neods of area
D) Surpoa the of housing 'n &iartÜ Urban frame.ywk
Plan "hue wpowiate sn acc«dame mth "oper plannzng and sustaineöæ
deveFwn•.ent •
Suppwl the devebpa•ent ot lands deygna:ed as ReydentiaJ (hase
Residentja (Phase 2} hithn 'fetime of tho Camry Agi. su*a to
numal Nanniry access reqr.üæne-f*s types o!
development may also be cmydered oa Resdenåal ("Tase 2) (ands
1 'use deve'wrnen.'s fw 00 lanty o•mvd
2 devehmpr;tg that are awwiate to the site "*ext. any
exjs:irn residenåat ameritr the existino pattern of develownent 'n the gee
71
SGT
Development
ResidenUi
SGT = Small Groatl Tonn
sev
1
Develoment
Re•identitl
SGT Srnall Grm•Æ1 VIII*
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 1 6th February 2026
AV deve0pments be suöect to compVance wth the Core Strs',egy in the
Cunty Deveöprrzr.{ Ran the Poecy Oäecåves in 'Be Urban Fromegoå Zan
Plan, the mncip!es of "oper planning and sust*nable development ard to
meeting rorma' planning, aæess and senidng requirements Oevæopments
be {he future use of the lands the Orv*erm
gro*th needs of ttys meropohtan area
b) Supput the ptovisi# haßrg zw:ed Rand in the Gumaun Urban FrameaM
Plan whye apgwia,'e •
Ya) Supwt me devebpnznt of lards designated as Residential (Phase T) arg
Re±denåal (Phase 2) witNn the åferrr,e of County Oeye!wment Aan suyect to
ro-rnal wannifV. aæess srd reqt.irements The foltmrg types of
deveøønent may also be consid«ed ResWen5al (Phase 2) lands.
f Sin* muse deveWænts f« members 'h ned "ands, sow
Io a 7 year on;pency clause
2 that 8te ap-V#nete to the Site any
existing reédenägf amer*y the exis5rg parem of devebpmeot tn the area
AM devebpn•.entswå be to camp'ance with the Core Strete.y io the
PIZ'. vindßes of prop« plannng susfanable
deye'oønent to meeting rumal Nanning, eccess and saviörg
requirements be permitted it *ill øeßÆice the Mure use
of the the kytgnerm growth needs of ttys rmtropoktan area
b) Suwat vovisOn zwæd 'and in the SmaY Growth Towns where
•g) Suw«t delebørent of 'Mds des&näted es ReSdential (hase t)
Residenbä/ (Phase 2) wiWn the Wetime of Cotmty man. su#d to
nvmal Nannirv eccesa and requirements The rolhhing types of
devdwnent may a!" be Residen&a' (Wse 2) lends.
1 muse deve!wnents fanSfy fanih/ owned lards. su#ct
to 8 7 year c,tavse
2 devehments that are epywiate to the Sie matext, any
reSd&Jti8' amenty am eitSDrg pattern of devefoønent in grea
A} &vebønents be subject to cunpjance Core Strategy in the
Cwnty Aan, the mi.•es o' planning sustanable
deydWnent and to meetng rxymä *n.'irg access
requirements wiH pemytted it wid the futum use
ot tho lands f. the WV-term gronth 01 tbs meropoåtan area
b) Suppa-t the of on zmed land in the Small Growth Wage where
The submission also states that the Variation does not offer guidance for Residential
Phase 2 lands in the settlements of Tuam, Ballinasloe, Athenry, Loughrea and Gort
and calls for specific policy objectives for Residential Phase 2 lands in these
settlements.
The submission suggests a number of Policy Objectives which are outlined in the
table below.
72
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
up-Wm
SST =
mey n
Chief Executive Response
The contents of this submission are noted. It is also noted that the submission relates
to lands in Tuam and Ballinasloe. Policy Objective SS2 Key Towns has been edited
as part of Variation 1 with the sole purpose of considering Residential Phase 2 lands
for development.
In addition, policy objectives SS3 Strategic Potential; SS4 Self Sustaining Towns
are also included in the Proposed Variation where it is sought to support the
provision of housing on zoned land where appropriate in accordance with proper
planning and sustainable development.
The proposed wording of the selected policy objectives and narrative are considered
sufficient and appropriate to satisfy the overall purpose of Variation No. 1 .
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. A. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
K. McHugh Farag and agreed by the Members.
73
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
GLW C200-34 - ENVIROPLAN CONSULTING LTD ON BEHALF OF
LEADLANE (ATHENRY) LTD
Pg 77-81
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission made by Enviroplan on behalf of Leadlane (Athenry) Ltd with
Residential Phase 2 lands in Athenry.
Welcomes the renewed focus on Residential Phase 2 lands. However, the
submission raises concerns that certain provisions remaining in the County Plan and
the Proposed Variation could frustrate planning applications on Residential Phase 2
lands if not changed. The submission raises concern with the use of the word
sequential and notes that it can be assumed that lands zoned Residential Phase 2
lands are locationally acceptable. The submission requests that the term 'sequential
growth' be omitted from the Proposed Variation.
Submission also requests that the wording of the proposed Variation should be
amended so that the term 'sequential' is replaced with 'consolidated'. It is requested
that this change is carried out in:
Section 2.4.4 entitled "Future Settlement Growth", change "sequential
growth "to "consolidated growth",
Section 2.4.5 entitled "MASP", change "sequential manner "to
"consolidated manner".
The submission raises concern that policy objectives that restrict Residential Phase
2 lands will remain as part of the Proposed Variation. Submission advises that if it is
the intention of the Planning Authority to treat Residential Phase 2 lands as
Residential Phase 1 then Policy Objectives such as GCMA 1, BUFP 1, GUFP 1,
SGTI and SGV 1 would need to be revised. Submission provides suggested text
changes.
74
GCMA 1
Development
Resldene•l
GCMA
Gahny City
Metr(W11an kea
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
8ugge•ted re-wordln
•fa' SUWUt the devebpaent of lands designated 99 R6üfeNial (hase 860
Reedentiä' (Phase 2) wifin Lfeåm9 of the Cotmty Oevekvnent Ban. sut*ed to
rumal access and se-vidng requ&eftHts types ot
deverpnent may afso be on 2) lands,
Single 'use members on faniiy owned
2 Nwvesidentiäl develoønents that ate Io the cayext
existing reuden5at amen:y gnd existing pattem of devebmmt tn the area
devebpments will be subÄ:t to CWB Stra:egy in
County Deve"nent "an, the tris Pfan the
BUFP 1
Oøveloynent
of am wstainawe to meetirw
rumgl planNfÜ. 9ccess am saviöng rmüements_ Devewnents "i" Wily be
pgrnitted j: hill ttb Mute use of the over-term gmMh
needs of metropoåtan
b' Suwat me provf±on 01 tW$ing zoned farø the area
in ecc«daræe
RetidenUal Swxvt devebpnEnt ot i)
Residential (Phase 2' ttb o/ the Cot.nty Oevekvneot Ran. su*ct fo
'Kymat Nanning and roqWement$ The types of
BUFP urban
man
GUFP
Oovelopment
GUT
Gan-aun Urban
F ran-mM Han
sor
Develoxnent
SGT = Sneh
SGV
Development
SGT z Srnan
Reidential
Re.wenti•l
may also be cMaMered Reskientie; (mase 2) 'ands;
We hoose f« feai.y laod$
2 that to tho cm•ext. any
newly the eristitp patern 01 in the groa
AM devebpments wig be to cMV5arx:e in the
Camty Oevebpamt Ran, in the t_Jrbm Ran
Plan. the MndAeS 01 "$.tan$# to
meeting rumal gccess am savidng requirenwms
be perrwtted it not the future use ttæ 'arW3 Wv-term
gronth needs ot metopoå:an ema
b) Sugwt the vovi$on ot in ttE &jadü (Jiban
nan where in mtn gopa
deve•wm.ørc
Suppon the deyebpn•zrq ot JaM3 (hase 1) arxj
Residential (Phase 2) mthn tm 'letüne ot tho Coænty to
'Uma' Wanning. eccess Ibe types ot
devekvnent may also be on Imd3,
Sirve ha.l$e deveVnents farrW momb«-s co laM3
2 NmqeEdentia' that are to tho såe context
exjgtina residential tho eristim D9førn ot in area
Ag devebpments Wi] be to cmwhrre wih Strategy ttE
Cwnty Deyebpawnt Aan, in tho Framewok
Pan, the of WWer Nannhg to
n-«ting normal planri@ access am requrenrnts DovebmrWifs
ba permittød it not "udZe the future use of tha
growth needs 01 area
b) Suppat the gvoviGon of land in Gurraun Urban
Plan where
•ate
Suwon the devehpnnnt 01 as Reüfentiaf (hase f) and
Residential (Phase 2) ifotime of tm Cotmty Aan, to
numal Wannirn access reqzåanents types ot
development may a!so ba Reswen5gf (Phaso 2) Imds:
Single tanüy mernbers family owned lards,
to a 7 year occupancy clause
2 Nm«eSdentläf devebmzne that are G"Wiate to the cwxext. any
eri$tirv amerity ard the parem of in the area
AM deyeVnent3 be to w.fh the Strategy in
County Plan, the pitRWes ot gyoper and
developn•rent and to meeting rurnal gccess $g-vidt9
requirements be permitted it hiN future use
Of the larÜs the bigerqerm growth needs ot area
b' Sognyt the gymis.ön ot housing zoned 'and the Smal Growth
Support the devebpa*nt of tMds desqnxed as Refdeotjal (h8se i)
Re$denåa' (Phase 2' *letime of t.tE Ben. su*ct to
nwma' Nannüv, access types 01
deve{oynønt may also be ResMenb81 (hase
1. Single touse 'ar* members lanii owwd "J#Ct
to 8 7 year occupancy clause
2 Nm-residenüal that we apgwjate to the 3de cmtext, any
existing amemy aM the exi3tiry pawn of devetpner,t in the wea
All devek)pmeots hiÆ be sub,Vct to camp-lame mtn the Coæ Strategy in [be
(h.mty Plan, Mndø'es of gvp« nano;ng aM suga;newe
devekwnent and to rumal ne33 arø
requrements Doyekvneofs be it gyvilx*ce future use
of the larÜ3 rhe gtowtit needs ot n-wc»åtan area
b) Suppa: the movi$ioa of on Wied larM rn the Smag Growth V•åage amre
bate
8
75
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission also states that the Variation does not offer guidance for Residential
Phase 2 lands in the settlements of Tuam, Ballinasloe, Athenry, Loughrea and Gort
and calls for specific policy objectives for Residential Phase 2 lands in these
settlements.
The submission suggests a number of Policy Objectives which are outlined in the
table below.
S'.pa••:
Loca
3 *Spa D
p..wn n na
Swat as 1
SS7 : To-am
Locs
n Ft—I
Chief Executive Response
The contents of this submission are noted. It is also noted that the submission refers
to lands in Athenry. Policy Objective SS3 Strategic Potential has been edited as part
of Variation No.l with the sole purpose of considering Residential Phase 2 lands for
development.
In addition, policy objectives SS2 Key Towns and SS4 Self Sustaining Towns are
also included in the Proposed Variation where it is sought to support the provision of
housing on zoned land where appropriate in accordance with proper planning and
sustainable development.
The proposed wording of the selected policy objectives and narrative are considered
sufficient and appropriate to satisfy the overall purpose of Variation No. 1 .
76
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Welby, seconded by Cllr.
S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-35 - ENVIROPLAN CONSULTING LTD ON BEHALF OF
PAT MALONE
Pg 81-85
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission made by Enviroplan on behalf of Pat Malone with Residential Phase
2 lands in Gort.
Welcomes the renewed focus on Residential Phase 2 lands. However, the
submission raises concerns that certain provisions remaining in the County Plan and
the Proposed Variation could frustrate planning applications on Residential Phase 2
lands if not changed. The submission raises concern with the use of the word
sequential and notes that it can be assumed that lands zoned Residential Phase 2
lands are locationally acceptable. The submission requests that the term 'sequential
growth' be omitted from the proposed variation.
Submission also requests that the wording of the Proposed Variation should be
amended so that the term 'sequential' is replaced with 'consolidated'. It is requested
that this change is carried out in:
Section 2.4.4 entitled "Future Settlement Growth", change "sequential
growth "to "consolidated growth",
Section 2.4.5 entitled "MASP", change "sequential manner "to
"consolidated manned'.
The submission raises concern that policy objectives that restrict Residential Phase
2 lands will remain as part of the Proposed Variation. Submission advises that if it is
the intention of the Planning Authority to treat Residential Phase 2 lands as
Residential Phase 1 then Policy Objectives such as GCMA 1, BUFP 1, GUFP 1,
SGTI and SGV 1 would need to be revised. Submission provides suggested text
changes.
77
GCU I
Development
Reidential
Gatåay Caty
tropd'tan Area
BUFP
Development
Residenü•l
8nætdl Urban
Plan
GUFP
Development
Retidential
GUFF'
Gatraun Urban
FranE*M Ran
SGT
Development
Re.Wenti•!
SGT ; Snuff Growth Tom
sgv
Development
Residential
SGT Srnall Gro•åti VIIIage
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
re.wodEng
-tä) Support the of •ands designated as Residenti91 (Phase and
Resideo&ät (Phase 2) *Nin the Cfetime of the Cornty ævewme-nt Zan. su*ct '0
Nanning, eccess ad sniting requirements The types o'
develwnent may arso be on Resdenfia: (mase 2)
Sa-we haze de',ebønents faro members on fgndy 0*ned 'ands
2 NMOSdent:al deæ!oørær.ts that are appropriate to me Ste context, an/
residentiät amenity end the exis5rg pa•tem of devebpmer.t in tie area
All devebpments wiff be su*ct to cvnp5ame the Chee Stategy m the
County ævebpment Zan. the %ecåves in Ibis Merw06tan Aam ttæ
of "oper aM sustänable development to meetirv
plenNng access and saydng requirements wit' mty be
p«miäed i: yejudice the future use of the lands for the bager.term growth
needs of Ws metropaqat area
b} Supat De of hg,ing zoned 'am in the grea
ate in -
Suppod the devehp,mnt of lands designated as ReSdent/al (Wse t)
ReSdenåaI (Phase 2) the Ffetime of the County Zan. su*d to
noema! *miry "ess ard sehdng requirements The 6båirg types o:
deveog•nent may a!so be cooSdered Resdenial (%ase 2) (ands,
1 deyeøprnents members on fenty cued 'ands
2 Nm-reSdential deyebønents th2! are appmpiete to Sde cm,'ext any
reSdenäaI amenity ard parem of 'n the grea
AM devebpments be sub•ect to cunp'ame with ttæ Core Strategy in the
Cunty Aan the in the Urban Framewo* man
Plan the MndNes of yopet Nanning and sustainable deyeÅWTMt and to
meeting normal planning, acess savang requitements Oeæopments
pemrtted it wit not the future use of the laro f« Brv-tem
needs of Ws metropdltsn area
b) Suppot Lhe povision o' housing Ued land in Ibe Urban F-rgnehWk
Aan whee apvoøia:e in with "oper ptenring Md sust*na-bte
Suwort the devetpmænt of lands designated es Residential (%ase 1) arW
Residenfi8t (Phase 2) hlWn åfefime of!he County Am sut*ect to
Nanning, and req'Årement' The types Ot
deve/wnent may also be Residential (hase 2) lands,
T Sirs* fan,)' members on famNy owred lams
2 No•æSdentiä! that are gpnphate to the Sie nitext. anx
existikto mSden&a' amenty the exisjno D8äem of devebment in the area
At' deve.tpments be subject to unpiance the Cwe Strategy in lhe
Deyebpnpnt PJgn, the O*ctiyes in the Urban Frameww* Plan
Plan. the pindßes of *nning aM sustainable and to
meeting mrmä' Nanning. access ard requirements DewdQments
ody permitted veudce the future use of the lards
growth needs of this metropoåsn area
b) Sup-put the provision of zmed land in the Gumaun Urben Framewwk
Plan *here •
(a) Support the devebgrent of 'ends deggnated as Residential (Ryese 1) and
Residen59f (Phase 2) within the Sfeåme of the County Oeve!wment Plan. su#ct
numal Wanning. access and smiar:g eqvirements The types 01
devetwnent may a'so be Residentiäl (Phäse 2) 'snds
Sng*e deve.•ments members fam#,' 0hned lards. su#ct
to 9 7 year occupancy c!euse
2 NM*esdentia' develoænerats that ere &ppropriate to !he Ste context. any
exirir,g reyden58/ amerkty ard the exgstj'V pafem of de•.gopmen,' in area
AM desebpmerds be to cunp;ance With the Core Strzegy in {he
Couny Oe•.elopment Plan, the mindples of ptop« planning arV sust&neble
devefWnent and to meeting "mat access and
requirements Develw,ment$ be permtted it wift xewdice future use
o! the lards the gro*th needs of this meropditan 3rea
b) Supp«t the "vison of housing on zv:ed 'and in the Sma* Gro•dh roans Rhee
Suppor deve.oprrænt of de*2'.ed as ReSdentia' (Phae erd
ReSden5al (Phase 2) *dhin of Development Piao, suäiea to
wrnä,' wanning. eccess and requirements folZåirg types of
may be coos'dered on ResidenYg' f*ese 'ands.
t Sng!e house de•.ehpments famdy members fan-ily oaned sug:ec,•
to a 7 year occupamy c/guse
2 NM-GSdentiäI devehpmen:s that 8pptopäate to the Ste any
existing reSdentia;• amenity ard the exjsfng paäem of deve.Wrert in the area
A} devebpments be su#ct to campfaxe with the Core Strategy in the
Cunty Plan. the "naves of prow Waning sustainawe
and to meet;ng tumal Asnnirg. gccess erd
reqwements Developments be permitted it wilt not future use
o' the lards the growth needs of tns netropoktan area
b) Suppu-t the wow,'ion of cn zæted yand in the Grown Ahere
78
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission also states that the Variation does not offer guidance for Residential
Phase 2 lands in the settlements of Tuam, Ballinasloe, Athenry, Loughrea and Gort
and calls for specific policy objectives for Residential Phase 2 lands in these
settlements.
The submission suggests a number of Policy Objectives which are outlined in the
table below.
KT * Ttzn"
89
SST
tan
O) Swat n
Chief Executive Response
The contents of this submission are noted. It is also noted that the submission refers
to lands in Gort. Policy Objective SS4 Self Sustaining Towns has been edited as part
of Variation No. I with the sole purpose of considering Residential Phase 2 lands for
development.
In addition, policy objectives SS2 Key Towns and SS3 Strategic Potential are also
included in the proposed variation where it is sought to support the provision of
housing on zoned land where appropriate in accordance with proper planning and
sustainable development.
The proposed wording of the selected policy objectives and narrative are considered
sufficient and appropriate to satisfy the overall purpose of Variation No. 1 .
79
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Chief Executive Recommendation
No Change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. S. Cunniffe and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-44 - EAMONN O HARA
Pg 85-87
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The purpose of the submission to promote the development of Flowervale for
housing delivery. The submission makes reference to the Housing Need and
Demand Assessment and Settlement Capacity Audit of Variation No. 1 . Submission
suggests that the SCA is solely focused on Residential Phase 1 and Residential
Phase 2 lands and it is further suggested that the sites in the SCA are peripheral
lacking public and active travel connections. The submission again promotes the
Flowervale site for housing delivery. It is further stated that the SCA does not focus
on active travel and makes reference to the NTA submission in this regard.
Submission advises that the Variation does not identify any site capable of delivering
housing with support accommodation.
The submission makes the argument that the lands at Flowervale meets all
requirements with additional factors making it an attractive location. The submission
argues that the Flowervale lands represent the only credible delivery mechanism for
objectives identified in the Gort LAP such as:
Gort River Walk,
Strategic walking and cycling connectivity to national routes,
Enhanced pedestrian permeability within the town centre, and
A future footbridge connection over the Gort River.
The submission makes the following requests:
Explicitly include the Flowervale lands within the HNDA and
Settlement Capacity Audit as required housing capacity for Gort.
Acknowledge that identified Housing-With-Support need cannot be
2.
met elsewhere in a compliant location.
Recognise Flowervale as uniquely aligned with NTA guidance on
3.
multi-modal accessibility and transport-led site selection.
Support a minor zoning rationalisation or site-specific objective to
4.
enable integrated delivery.
80
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
5. Commit to constructive pre-planning engagement to bring forward a
compliant scheme.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. The focus of the SCA is on Residential
Phase 1 and Phase 2 lands. The Local Transport Plan for Gort focuses on improved
active travel measures in the town. See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-
40 and the SCA.
The purpose of the Proposed Variation No. I is to align with the requirements of the
Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines NPF Implementation: Housing Growth
Requirements (July 2025). In essence the Guidelines are seeking Local Authorities
to assess the current adopted Development Plans against the requirement to provide
the capacity to deliver housing to the extent identified in these Guidelines. These
new requirements are in relation to new housing targets for each Local Authority,
which may include specialised housing.
The HNDA does not identify specific sites for housing delivery.
Only submissions that relate directly to the proposed draft variation may be taken
into account in the preparation of the Chief Executive's Report.
Chief Executive Recommendation
See Chief Executive's Response to GLW-C200-40
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. L. Harney, seconded by Cllr.
P. Feeney and agreed by the Members.
Cllr. G. Donoghue queried whether there was an opportunity for her to discuss the
HNDA in relation to the two submissions from E. O'Hara. Ms. Loughnane advised
that discussion of the HNDA formed only part of today's proceedings. Cllr. G.
Donoghue then enquired whether there was an opportunity to give Mr. O'Hara what
he wanted in terms of the Flowervale site. Ms. Loughnane advised that it was
beyond the scope of this Variation and that the CDP Review process would be the
appropriate process for same. Ms. Loughnane clarified that the Section 28
Guidelines requested the bringing forward of additional land for residential
development, which in this case was R2 lands. She stated that individual sites were
not being analysed for the purpose of giving effect to this guidance. She stated that
once the CDP review process was undertaken, with the five LAP's subsumed into it,
then there would be adequate scope to access the zonings of individual sites.
GLW C200-45 - EAMONN O HARA
Pg 87
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
This submission is a clarification of submission GLW•C200-44.
The submission wishes to address the obligation on the HNDA to demonstrate how
identified housing need can be delivered in practice, in accordance with national
policies.
81
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The submission wishes to clarify the following:
The submission claims that the HNDA cannot lawfully identify the need for Housing-
With-Support/older persons in Gort without identifying at least one viable delivery
location.
Not to show Flowervale as a "preferred site" but to only demonstrate the sites
positive qualities.
That the Open Space zoning on the lands has no viable path to implementation.
The issue of the submission is around the identification of need in the HNDA without
demonstration of a mechanism to deliver the required development.
The submission directly requests the following:
Justify the HNDA identification of need without identification of sites, and
Confirm if the Flowervale site is an acceptable site to contribute to HNDA-identified
need.
Chief Executive Response
The basis in which Local Authorities must conduct a HNDA stems from the National
Planning Framework: First Revision.
Zoned sites for delivery of residential development have been identified across
County Galway.
It is noted that the site at Flowervale is zoned as Existing Residential in the Gort
Local Area Plan.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. K. McHugh Farag, seconded
by Cllr. T. Welby and agreed by the Members.
GLW C200-46 - EAST GALWAY WINDFARM ACTION ALLIANCE
Ms. Loughnane gave an overview of the issues raised in this submission and read
CE Response.
The submission states that the East Galway Windfarm Action Alliance represents 5
No. of communities in East Galway. The submission is specifically related to the
cumulative and long-term impacts of large-scale wind energy developments on rural
communities. While noting the essential role of renewable energy in national policies,
it also seeks that the Development Plan addresses the unintended consequence of
wind farm zoning, as in the opinion of the East Galway Windfarm Action Alliance
such zonings can have negative impact on one-off rural housing and small-scale
cluster developments through for example, sterilisation, setbacks and objections on
82
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
planning applications by wind farm operators. The submission seeks a more
balanced approach between wind energy development and rural housing. These
effects undermine rural settlement patterns, weakens family and community ties, and
runs counter to national and local policy objectives aimed at sustaining rural
populations and services according to the submission. The submission seeks that
the Development Plan addresses these issues to better balance the proper planning
and sustainable development of rural areas with specific reference to the balance
between renewable energy development and rural living.
Chief Executive Response
The contents of the submission are noted. However, this does not specifically fall
within the scope of Variation No. 1 . The County Development Plan, including Chapter
4 Rural Living and Development and the contents of the Local Authority Renewable
Energy Strategy do not seek to prohibit rural housing in County Galway. The
planning application statistics for the County would indicate positive delivery of
housing across the County in accordance with proper planning and sustainable
development.
Chief Executive Recommendation
No change.
The CE recommendation was proposed by Cllr. T. Welby, seconded by Cllr.
T. Grealish and agreed by the Members.
Ms. Loughnane advised that all submissions received had been dealt with.
She advised that AA and SEA Conclusion Statements would now be read into
the record.
AA DETERMINATION
Mr. Corcoran brought up SEA and AA Determination on screen and read it into
record of Meeting. It was Noted by Members.
Ms. Loughnane advised it was now time for passing of the resolution to adopt the
Plan. She advised that the Variation is effective immediately once the resolution
was passed by the Members.
RESOLUTION FOR MAKING OF VARIATION 1 TO THE GALWAY
COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2022 - 2028
Having considered the contents of Variation 1, the Chief Executive's Report on
submissions received and the
The Screening for Strategic Environmental Assessment Report for Proposed
Variation 1 to the Galway County Development Plan 2022 — 2028 (Original
Report and Updated Report following public display).
83
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
The Screening for Appropriate Assessment (AA) Report for Proposed
Variation 1 to the Galway County Development Plan 2022 — 2028. (Original
Report and Updated Report following public display).
The SEA Screening Determination for the Proposed Variation 1 to the Galway
County Development Plan 2022 — 2028. (Original Determination and Updated
Determination following public display).
The AA Screening Determination for the Proposed Variation 1 to the Galway
County Development Plan 2022 — 2028. (Original Determination and Updated
Determination following public display).
Written submissions relating to SEA, AA and SFRA made during the Variation
preparation process.
Ongoing advice on SEA, AA and SFRA from the Council's agents
In accordance with the provisions of Section 13 of the Planning and Development
Act 2000 (as amended), the Elected Members of Galway County Council agree,
by resolution, to make Variation 1 to the Galway County Development Plan, as
recommended by the Chief Executive in his report and at the Special Meeting of
1 6th February 2026 and to proceed in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning
and Development Act 2000 (as amended) to publish notice of the making of
Variation 1 of the Galway County Development Plan.
The Resolution for making Variation 1 to the Galway County Development
Plan 2022 - 2028 was proposed by Cllr. D. Collins seconded by Cllr. L.
Harney and agreed by the Members.
Cllr. D. Geraghty requested that potential amendment of the Habitats Directive and
other environmental legislation should be inserted into the agenda for a future
meeting.
CE L. Conneally thanked the Members for their work during this process and noted
that Galway County Council were now the third Local Authority in the country to have
given effect to the Section 28 Guidelines through this Variation. He stated that it
sent a very significant signal to Government, to the citizens in Galway and the
Construction sector that Galway was open for business. He further stated that
Galway County Council had now accommodated in excess of 7,500 additional units
with the bringing into parity of R2 lands with RI lands. He thanked Mr. Hanrahan,
Ms. Loughnane, Mr. Corcoran and Forward Planning Team for their work as well as
the Councillors for their deliberation during the process.
Ms. Loughnane also thanked her Forward Planning Team for their work during the
process and thanked the Members, the Chief Executive and An Cathaoirleach.
An Cathaoirleach D. Collins, on behalf of all the Councillors thanked ail the Forward
Planning Team for all their hard work on getting Variation completed.
The Meeting ended.
84
Minutes of Special Council Meeting held on 16th February 2026
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
85
