Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at Åus AN CHONTAE PROSPECT HILL
CATHAOIRLEACH•.
I LATHAIR FREISIN•.
Baill:
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Monday. 23rd March 2026
Cllr. D. Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh. [Cllr. S. Broderick, M. Connolly, S.
Cunniffe, T. Ö Curraoin, G. Donohue, P.
Feeney, T. Grealish, A. Harney, L. Harney,
M. Hoade, C. Keane, D. Kelly, P. Killilea, G.
King, M. Lee, M, Maher, E. Mannion, J.
McClearn, K. McHugh Farag, M. McNamara,
M. Regan, N. Thomas, O. Turner, S. Walsh
and T. Welby.
Comh. /Cllr. l. Canning, J. Charity, G.
Finnerty, D. Geraghty, P. Keaveney, D.
Killilea, M. Leainde, P. Mac An Iomaire, S.
McHugh Ryan, E. F. Parsons.
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L.
Hanrahan, Director of Services, Mr. Michael
Owens, Director of Services, Mr. Uinsinn
Finn, Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Ms. K. O'Connor,
Head of Finance, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. J. Brann Meetings
Administrator, Ms. L. Keady, A/Senior
Executive Officer, Ms. U. Ni Eidhin,
Administrative Officer, Ms. H. Riordan, Staff
Officer, Ms. S. Elwood, Staff Officer.
Page 1 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
The Cathaoirleach and Elected Members paid tribute to the late Dolores Keane and
Michael Lyster. They were described as proud Galwegians and legends in their
respective crafts. Sympathies were extended to both their families. The
Cathaoirleach informed the Members that Books of Condolences had been opened
in County Hall. Condolences were also extended to Cllr. Gerry King on the recent
passing of his sister and Cllr. Declan Geraghty on the passing of his aunt.
Sympathies were also conveyed to the families of the late Niamh Kavanagh of
Claregalway and Alan McDonagh, Headford.
ITEM NO.I CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
4692
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. P. Killilea the minutes of the
Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 23rd February 2026 were AGREED.
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. Ö Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. Lee the minutes of
the Special Meeting held on 16th February 2026 were AGREED.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4693
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Donohue the minutes of the
Corporate Policy Group held on 16th February 2026 were NOTED.
Cllrs. Donohue & McNamara raised the following points and queries:
• The authority of the Corporate Policy Group (CPG) to remove Notices of
Motions from plenary agendas, was queried.
Page 2 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Walsh the minutes of the
Community, Irish Language, Gaeltacht, Tourism & Integration Strategic Policy
Committee held on 3rd December 2025 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Cunniffe the minutes of the
Housing Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on 18th December 2025 were
NOTED.
ITEM NO.3 FILLING OF A CASUAL VACANCY ON THE CLIMATE ACTION
BIODIVERSITY & HERITAGE STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE.
4694
Report dated 16th March 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Hoade it was AGREED
to appoint Mr. Michael Haverty as the Irish Farmers Association (IFA) sectoral
representative to the Climate Action Biodiversity & Heritage Strategic Policy
Committee.
ITEM NO.4 TO CONSIDER THE DRAFT STANDING ORDERS REGULATING
PROCEEDINGS AND MEETINGS OF THE PLENARY COUNCIL.
4695
Report dated 16th March 2026 was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Welby SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn it was AGREED to
adopt the Standing Orders Regulating proceedings and meetings of the Plenary
Council.
Director of Services, Mr. Owens reminded the Members that at the November 2025
plenary meeting, there was unanimous support to amend the Standing Orders in
relation to the Presidential nomination process. The proposed amendments have been
discussed at Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) and Corporate Policy Group (CPG).
Page 3 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
The proposed new Standing Order number 76, states that potential Presidential
candidates must obtain the support of at least 10% of the Elected Members of the
Council, which is currently 4 Elected Members, to attend and present at the Special
Council Meeting convened to consider the nominations for the Presidential Election.
Furthermore, only candidates who attend the meeting in person will be eligible to be
nominated by the Council.
Comh. I Cllrs. Welby, Cunniffe, Regan, McHugh Farag, M. Connolly, Kelly & O
Curraoin raised the following points and queries:
The Council should not make the process for potential Presidential election
candidates more difficult. Nominations should not be restricted to party
candidates.
The requirement of approval of 10% of the Elected Members was deemed to
be fair. A mechanism is required to safeguard the integrity of the Office of
President.
Providing a remote attendance option should be considered to ensure
potential candidates are not disadvantaged by clashes with special Local
Authority meetings.
The County and City Management Association (CCMA) should consider
expanding the meeting timeframe so that sessions can be staggered across
multiple days, helping to eliminate overlapping meeting times.
The President of Ireland should be the President of the 32 counties.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
• As the enabling resolution was adopted within the previous 6 months, it was
necessary that any amendment adhere to the terms of the enabling resolution.
Therefore, an amendment to allow for remote attendance was not possible at
this time, however, it was open to the Members to reconsider provision for
remote attendance at a later date following the expiry of the 6 months.
Page 4 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
ITEM NO. 5. TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE ADOPT THE
GALWAY COUNCIL ANNUAL SERVICE DELIVERY PLAN 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 134(A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
4696
Draft Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the
meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn the Galway County
Council Annual Service Plan 2026, in accordance with section 134(a) of the Local
Government Act 2001 (as amended) was AGREED.
Director of Services, Mr. Owens informed the Members that the Draft Annual Service
Delivery Plan 2026 had been considered at CPG, where it was recommended for
approval by the Members at plenary level. The Plan sets out the principal services to
be provided by the Council to the public and is consistent with the adopted Budget for
2026. The Plan is based on Strategic Goals and Supporting Strategies as outlined in
the Corporate Plan and sets out the actions which the Council intends to take in 2026.
Operational updates will continue to be provided through the regular monthly
Management Reports to the Elected Council. In addition, quarterly progress reports
will be made available, the first of which will be before the Members at the May plenary
meeting.
Cllr. Parsons raised the following points and queries:
Concern that there is no alignment to national zero tolerance policy relating to
domestic violence measures.
It was asked that the National Zero Tolerance Policy be incorporated in further
iterations of the Annual Service Delivery Plan.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
• The policy is in alignment as detailed in the Corporate Plan. He referred to page
36 of the Plan which references support to allocate 2 properties for provision of
Page 5 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
supported medium-term housing, timelines and performance indicators in
relation to this.
In addition, there will be quarterly updates and engagement with the Elected
Members.
ITEM NO. 6 TO CONSIDER AND APPROVE IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE THE
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL COMMUNITY SUPPORT SCHEMES 2026
PROPOSED LIST OF APPROVALS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PERFORMANCE OF ITS FUNCTIONS UNDER SECTION 67 OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 AS AMENDED.
4697
Report dated 23rd March 2026 was published on the Extranet and circulated at the
meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Hoade SECONDED by Cllr. Mannion the Galway County
Council Community Support Schemes 2026 proposed list of approvals, in
accordance with the performance of its functions under 67 of the Local Government
Act 2001 (as amended) was AGREED.
Director of Services, Mr. Owens informed the Members that it was proposed to
allocate €424, 182 under the Community Support Schemes 2026 to different groups
across the county. The funding complements and supplements the other significant
work programmes that the Council undertakes at local level, as well as investment
through various other Department funding schemes. He highlighted the new
Environment and Sports Support Schemes made possible by means of the
additional funding allocated by the Members through the budget process for 2026.
He asked that the Members consider and adopt the scheme, following which the
successful groups will be communicated with. The unsuccessful groups will be
guided on how to improve their application for future applications.
Cllrs. Hoade & Mannion raised the following points and queries
Page 6 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
The staff were thanked for the preparatory work carried out in advance of
applications being received, by running webinars and information sessions.
ITEM NO. 7 TO CONSIDER THE LOCAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE (LCDC) ANNUAL REPORT ON PERFORMANCE OF FUNCTIONS
FOR 2025. IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 128B (1) (l) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 AS AMENDED BY THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
REFORM ACT 2014.
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4698
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. King the Local
Community Development Committee (LCDC) Annual Report on performance of
functions for 2025, in accordance with Section 128B (l)(i) of the Local Government
Act 2001 as amended by the Local Government Reform Act 2014 was NOTED.
Director of Services, Mr. Owens outlined the contents of the Annual Report. It
outlines the membership and administration and work of the LCDC in 2025, the
Local Economic and Community Plan 2024-2030 and the Social Inclusion and
Community Activation Programme. Galway County LCDC received an allocation of
€213,600 under The Local Enhancement Programme 2025, he outlined some of the
projects that benefitted from this funding.
The Cathaoirleach acknowledged the work of the LCDC and community groups,
which he has seen firsthand during his time as Cathaoirleach. Cllr. M. Connolly
acknowledged the fantastic work that voluntary groups cany out and the role of
Galway Rural Development in Ballinasloe. Both Cllr. M. Connolly and Comh. Mac An
Iomaire acknowledged the great work carried out by community groups and the
committee.
Page 7 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23'd March 2026
ITEM NO. 8 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF THE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4699
Report dated 16th March 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Lee it was AGREED to
authorise Cllrs. Regan, & Welby to attend AILG February Training Module 'From
Policy to Practice; What Local Authorities in Ireland can offer to support disabled
people and an ageing population" at Fairways Hotel, Dundalk on 19th February 2026.
(Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Comh. O Curraoin it was
AGREED to authorise Cllr. Regan, to attend Association of Irish Regions Training
Seminar 2026 at Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal on 25th & 26th
February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Hoade it was AGREED
to authorise Cllrs. L. Harney, Cllr. King & Cllr Mc Clearn, to attend AILG Elected
Members Training Programme March 2026 Module 2 — "Overview of New Housing
for all Action Plan and Tenancy Rights Implications for Local Authorities and
Councillors" at Radisson Blu Hotel, Sligo on 21st March 2026. (Retrospective
Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Hoade it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. Hoade, to attend AILG Elected Members Training Programme
March 2026 Module 2 — "Overview of New Housing for all Action Plan and Tenancy
Rights Implications for Local Authorities and Councillors" at Radisson Blu Hotel,
Limerick on 19th March 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
Page 8 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. L. Harney it was AGREED
to authorise Cllr. L. Harney to attend AILG-UCC Climate Crises and Local
Government Certificate — Blended delivery — online and in-person classes. UCC
Cork & On-line. 12 week course
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Lee it was AGREED to
authorise Cllrs. King & Mc Clearn to attend AILG Annual Training Conference 2026
at Hotel Minella, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary on 22nd & 23rd April 2026.
ITEM NO. 9. TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE MEETINGS OTHER EVENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001 (AS AMENDED).
4700
Report dated 16th March 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Regan it was AGREED to
authorise Cllr. Reddington to attend Local Community Partnership Chairpersons
Meeting, at The Atrium, Department of Justice, St. Stephens Green, Dublin on 5th
February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO. 10 TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDING OF CONFERENCE
ATTENDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5F) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4701
Report dated 16th March 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. L. Harney the Summary of
Proceedings at conferences attended were NOTED.
Page 9 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
ITEM NO. 11. TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - MARCH 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
Report was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4702
The Management Report — March 2025, in accordance with Section 136(2) of the
Local Government Act 2001 (As Amended) was NOTED.
Cllrs. Maher, A. Harney, Mannion, McHugh Ryan & Lee raised the following
points and queries:
The progress on the new Loughrea Fire Station was welcomed.
The Arts Office were thanked for organising the recent consultation sessions.
The Ahascragh Streetscape Scheme Launch was welcomed.
It was asked when the use of Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV) would be in
operation in County Galway.
The EV Charging Infrastructure (ZEVI) plans to expand charging points was
welcomed.
Information on the 'Vacant above the Shop' grant was requested.
The information sessions that were held on Local Authority Home Loans was
praised.
It was asked that Locat Authority Home Loan information sessions be held in
An Cheathrü Rua and Clifden.
Congratulations were extended to Tuam Leisure centre on their 20th
anniversary and on the Action Tuam digitat event that was held last month.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
5 sites have been identified for the installation of CCTV, they will be up and
running in the next couple ofweeks.
Page 10 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
The Council are awaiting information on the Vacant above the Shop Grant.
He clarified that that commercial unit must remain commercial to qualify.
The amount of grant that will be received will be dependent on the number of
units.
Information will be circulated to the Members once it is received.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Local Authority Home Loan information sessions will be held in each
Municipal District.
Cllrs. Hoade, McNamara, McHugh Farag, Donohue & Welby raised the
following points and queries:
The recent Galway County Final of the Student Enterprise Programme and
the work of the Local Enterprise Office were highly praised.
The design by the Regeneration Team for the potential redevelopment of the
Local Area Office site in Athenry was welcomed.
Clarification was sought on the discussions that are being held with larnröd
Éireann regarding the dis-used level crossing in Caheroyan, Athenry.
Reform was sought in relation to the Rebuilding Ireland Home Loans and Croi
Cönaithe grants, as the absence of bridging finance is preventing many
people from availing of these supports.
It was queried why applicants are not drawing down the full value of the
available grants.
An update was sought on the EV Charging Points regional strategy being led
by Donegal County Council.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
• The discussions on the level crossing at Caheroyn, Athenry related to the
required investigative upgrade works for the Western Rail Corridor.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
Page 11 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Changes have been made to the Local Authority Home Loan to address the
shortfalls.
In his opinion, he does not think that stage payments will be introduced for the
Croi Cånaithe grants.
He commended the team for the volume of work that has been carried out in
the Croi Cönaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant. For which 685
applications have been submitted, 486 have received initial approval and 127
have been paid.
Each application is assessed at site visit. A top up grant for properties with
structural issues is available. If no structural issues exist, then this portion of
the grant cannot be availed of.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn
Responsibility for the electric vehicle charging infrastructure is moving from
the Department of Transport to Transport Infrastructure Ireland (Til).
He confirmed that the Council are part of a regional strategy, of which
Donegal County Council are the lead authority.
Updates will be provided through the SPC, Management Report and
Municipal Districts (MDs).
ITEM 12. TO CONSIDER THE SUMMER READY REPORT
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4703
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Mannion SECONDED by Cllr. King the Summer Ready
Report was AGREED.
Following the playing of a promotion video, Director of Services, Mr. Owens outlined
the contents of the Summer Ready Report. The first part of which contains the
attractions that Galway has to offer, the next section includes festivals and events that
are held around the county, and the final section of the document is the Summer
Ready Report. The full report was before the Members for their consideration and
noting.
Page 12 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Comh./ClIrs. Mannion, McHugh Farag, A. Harney, Regan, Mac An Iomaire and
Hoade raised the following points and queries:
•
It was asked if this material is circulated to hotels.
Lack of parking facilities at beaches was raised.
Gurteen Bay beach is the only beach with a lifeguard in Connemara.
Issues regarding camper vans at beaches needs to be addressed.
Disappointment was expressed at the absence of the Tuam area in the
promotional video.
All areas of the county should be showcased.
It was requested that the opening hours of the Aughrim Interpretative Centre
be extended and that it be opened beyond the months of May to September.
The provision of lifeguards at Banagher Shannon Bank Park was raised.
Lifeguards should be in place earlier than June.
Public toilets in beach areas should be open from May.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
•
Confirmed that the material will be made available to hotels.
The season for the Aughrim Interpretative Centre has been extended by 2
weeks. The completion of the feasibility report will inform the approach taken
going forward.
The video shown was a collage of various videos as a sample, he assured the
Members that promotional content for Tuam will be developed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
Extending the provision of lifeguards is budget dependent.
Many of the lifeguards are students and are not available in May.
A commitment was made in the budget to examine the provision of lifeguards
at Shannon Bank Park.
Page 13 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• This is the first version of the new format for the Summer Ready Report. It is
also an information piece for the County's tourism destinations and the
services that County Galway provides. The promotional material will be
balanced to reflect each Municipal District.
ITEM 13. CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
4704
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 25.06.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Education and Youth — Resolution — Guidelines for Bus Drivers.
Letter dated 26th June 2026 from Niamh Kelly, School Transport Section
Department of Education and Youth — Reply to Resolution letter dated
25.06.25.
Email dated 05.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Niamh Kelly, School
Transport Section, Department of Education — follow up to Resolution letter
dated 26th June.
Letter dated 04.03.26 from Ann Marie Howard — School Transport Section,
Department of Education and Youth — reply to follow up email dated 05.02.26.
Letter dated 26.11.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Transport — Resolution letter — Traffic Calming Speed Ramps.
Email dated 24.02.26 from Amanda Corley, Private Secretary to Minister O
Brien, Department of Transport — Reply to Resolution letter dated 26.11.2025.
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation — Resolution Letter — Issues with Mobile Phone
Coverage.
Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Garrett Blaney, Chairperson Commission for
Communication Regulation — Reply to Resolution letter dated 16.12.2025.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation — follow up query to Letter dated 30.01 2026.
Page 14 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Colette Andrews Personal Assistant to the
Commission for Communications Regulation — Acknowledgement to letter
dated 04.03.2026.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Rural Water Unit,
Department of Housing, Local Govemment & Heritage — Resolution Letter —
Extend deadline in Measure A8 Demonstration Projects.
Email date 09.03.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary to Minister
Browne, Reply to Resolution letter dated 03.02.2026.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne
Minister for Housing Local Government & Heritage — Resolution — Increase in
Additional Needs Payment.
Email dated 05.03.2026 from Jack Savage Private Secretary to Minister
Browne, reply to Resolution dated 03.02.2026 — Increase in Additional Needs
Payment.
Letter dated 18.02.2026 from Westmeath County Council — Resolution Letter
— Income Thresholds for Social Housing and HAP.
Letter dated 02.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Maritime Area
Regulatory Authority — Resolution — Licences to remove seaweed from shored
on the coast of Co. Galway.
Letter dated 1003.2026 from Laura Brien, Chief Executive Officer, Maritime
Area Regulatory Authority — Reply to Resolution letter dated 02.03.2026.
Letter dated 02.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister James
Browne, Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution
letter — Modular Housing Guidelines.
Letter dated 02.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister James
Browne, Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution
letter — Croi Cånaithe (Towns) Fund Scheme.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Taoiseach Michéal
Martin — Resolution — Increase in provision of Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Department of the Taoiseach —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026.
Page 15 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
Email dated 06.03.2026 to department of Rural & Community Development
and the Gaeltacht — Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase in Irish
Medium Education circulated to Minister for the Gaeltacht.
Email date 06.03.2026 from Noeleen Fagan, Secretary to Dara Calleary,
Minister for the Gaeltacht, acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated
06.03.2026 — Increase in Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister for Education
— Circulation of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase in provision of
Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Customer Support unit, Department of
Education and Youth — Acknowledgement of receiving Resolution letter dated
04.03.2026 — Increase in provision of Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 10.03.2026 to all Oireachtas Members in this Constituency —
Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase in Provision of Irish Medium
Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Maria Burke on behalf of Noel Grealish TD —
Acknowledgement of receiving Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase
in provision of Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Sean Canney, Minister of State —
Acknowledgement of receiving Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase
in provision of Irish Medium Education.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Mairéad Farrell, TD — Acknowledgement of
receiving Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Increase in provision of Irish
Medium Education.
Email dated 10.03.2026 from Galway County Council to all Local Authorities —
Circulation of Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026 — Provision of Irish Medium
Education.
Letter dated 05.03.2026 from Sligo County Council — Resolution Letter -
Mother and Baby homes.
Letter dated 05.03.2026 from Leitrim County Council — Resolution Letter —
Implement revised EU Anti — Trafficking Directive.
Letter dated 05.03.2026 from Leitrim County Council — Resolution Letter — TII
to set up separate funding streams.
Page 16 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Taoiseach Michéal
Martin — Resolution letter — Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 to all Oireachtas Members — Circulation of Resolution
letter dated 04.03.2026 — Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied Palestinian
Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Senator Aubrey McCarthy — Acknowledgement
of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Matt McCarthy TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Ciaran Ahern TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Jennifer Whitmore TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Barry Heneghan TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Hazel O Grady TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from James Lawless TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Tom Brabazon TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Jen Cummins TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Page 17 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Eoin Hayes TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from office of Senator Dee Ryan — Acknowledgement
of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Holly Cairns TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Shane Moynihan TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Paul Lawless TD — Acknowledgement of
Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Office of The Tånaiste & Minister for Finance —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli
Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from office of Mary Lou McDonald TD -
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli
Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 07.03.2026 from Martin Diver, Office of Pat the Cope Gallagher —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli
Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 09.03.2026 from Padraig Rice TD — Reply Resolution letter dated
03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 09.03.2026 from Niamh Fitzpatrick office of Senator Mary
Fitzpatrick — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend
Israeli Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 09.03.2026 from Edel, Pa to Cathal Crowe TD —
Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli
Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Page 18 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Email dated 10.03.2026 from Evan Barry, Leinster House office Administrator
— Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli
Settlements in Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 10.03.2026 from Adam, office of Richard Boyd Barrett TD —
Reply to Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in
Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 10.03.2026 from Marie Henry, office of Marian Harkin TD — Reply
to Resolution letter dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied
Palestinian Territory.
Email dated 06.03.2026 from Joe Cooney TD — reply to Resolution letter
dated 03.03.2026 Amend Israeli Settlements in Occupied Palestinian
Territory.
Letter date 10.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister Marting
Heydon, Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marie — Resolution Urgent Meeting
to instigate dialogue.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Bord Bia —
Resolution Urgent Meeting to instigate dialogue.
Letter dated 10.03.2026 from Clare County Council — Resolution —
Emergency cost of disability payment.
Letter dated 12.03.2026 form Longford County Council — Resolution —
Emergency payment for disabled people.
ITEM 14. QUESTION
4705
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following Question prior to the meeting:
'To ask the Chief Executive is Galway County Council liable for public safety at
Dunguaire Castle given that it states the following on the website "Dunguaire Castle
means Dunguaire Castle and Galway County Council" Dunguaire Castle I Thinqs
to do in Galway I Castles in Ireland I Book Now I Dunguaire Castle. '
Page 19 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
The following reply issued:
Dunguaire Castle remains in the ownership of The Shannon Airport Group and
accordingly, responsibility for public liability and insurance rests with The Shannon
Airport Group as property owner.
The references to Galway County Council that previously appeared on the Dunguaire
Castle website related to an earlier operational period when booking information was
shared with Galway County Council in anticipation of potential future arrangements.
These references have now been removed, and the website has been updated
accordingly.
Galway County Council has no operational role in the Castle at present and is not
responsible for insurance or liability matters.
Cllr. Donohue was happy to hear that the reference to Galway County Council has
been removed from the website. She urged that the castle be reopened as soon as
possible and stressed that revenue is being lost from its closure.
ITEM 15. QUESTION
4706
Cllr. Mc Namara submitted the following Question prior to the meeting:
'In recent correspondence with representatives of AMASS, Galway County Council
stated that it was unable to identify or locate records detailing the data, methodology,
or analytical process used in the preparation of the Local Authority Renewable
Energy Strategy (LARES) maps, including the solar opportunity and constraint
mapping.
Can the Chief Executive explain why Galway County Council is unable to identify or
produce records showing:
Page 20 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
the datasets used, the methodology applied, the weighting of factors, or the
alternatives considered in the preparation of these maps?
In the absence of such records, how can the Council be satisfied that the LARES
maps are sufficiently robust, evidence-based and compliant with national guidance
and environmental assessment requirements to be relied upon in fotward planning
and development management decisions?
Given that these maps have been treated as a material consideration in assessing
renewable energy developments, does the Chief Executive consider it appropriate to
continue relying on them until a fully documented and transparent evidential basis is
available?'
The following reply issued:
I wish to advise that Cllr McNamara's question is in relation to a submitted AIE
((Access to Information on the Environment) Regulations 2007 to 2018 (S.I. No. 133
of 2007, S.I. No. 662 of 2011, S.I. 615 of 2014 and S.I. No. 309 of 2018).
An appropriate response was issued to the individual as outlined below:
LARES forms part of the County Development Plan 2022-2028. The County
Development Plan was prepared by the Forward Planning Unit under the direction of
the Chief Executive and ultimately adopted through the County Development Plan
process and the Elected Members.
I wish to confirm that there were no internal datasets, layers, sources or reports
produced for the LARES that were not already in the public domain.
All maps and datasets within the LARES are credited within the LARES itself. For
example: Figure 1: All Island Generation Capacity Statement 2019-2028.
All maps, tables etc published in the LARES were not primary research, the
combination of data and maps that are within the Strategy were prepared taking
account of relevant European, national, regional and local planning frameworks and
guidelines. These include maps and documents produced for the National Planning
Page 21 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Framework, the Northern & Western Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy and
the Galway County Development Plan.
In conclusion, Galway County Council was able to show the records required to
produce the LARES as part of the County Development Plan and Galway County
Council consider them appropriate and robust in order to assess planning
applications.
Cllr. McNamara informed the meeting that this motion originated with affected
community groups. He looked for an explanation as to the identity of the source of
the data sets. He asked how he can trust the guidance when the data source is
unknown
Director of Services, Mr. Hanrahan responded that the requested data and its source
has been provided. While the Council itself did not produce the raw data, it came
from national documents which informed the County Development Plan. He assured
Cllr. McNamara that that data is accurate and up to date.
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
4707
Cllr. Jimmy McClearn submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'That Galway County Council will Compulsory Purchase the Derelict building
Formerly known as the Shannon Oaks Hotel. This building has remained in a derelict
condition for fifteen years with the owners making no attempt to refurbish it.
There are apanments at the rear of this building which are not in compliance with
planning permission and therefore are unauthorised. '
The following reply issued:
Previous engagement has taken place with the owners regarding potential Planning
applications for the redevelopment of the site.
Page 22 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
For a CPO process to commence on any property the Council must have the
relevant policy platform in the County Development Plan. It is not a current policy
objective in the County Development Plan to acquire hotel properties in private
ownership.
The Local Authority has engaged with the property owners regarding the derelict
sites notice issued and the owners continue to engage with the Council on this
issue. A number of the measures within the derelict site notice issued have
been completed by the owners to date in respect of the repair and replacement of
damaged perimeter hoarding around the site and removal of waste that was present
around the property. Additional height has also been added to sections of the fence
line which had been identified as most likely areas of trespass, and a boundary gate
has been secured on site with gate locking system replaced. New CCTV has been
installed to help deal with vandalism and trespass on site.
Cllr. McClearn spoke on his motion, he said that while it is not current policy in the
County Development Plan (CDP) to acquire private hotels, the Shannon Oaks
cannot be defined as a hotel, as it has been a derelict building for 15 years. The lack
of hotel is a significant loss to Portumna. He proposed that the Compulsory
Purchase Order (CPO) is let proceed to arbitration, to ascertain the value of the site
alone, as the building itself will need to be removed. He also said that the illegal
occupation of the long-term apartments must be addressed.
Comh./Cllrs. Kelly, McHugh Farag, O Curraoin, Keane, Regan, Donohue,
Parsons, M. Connolly, McClearn, Welby and King raised the following points
and queries:
It is unacceptable that the hotel is left dormant and its absence is a huge loss
to the area.
It was asked if the Council have the legal power to issue a CPO and if the
Council have the budget available to proceed with one.
If this approach is followed through it will set a precedent for other properties
across the county.
Page 23 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
The best way to find a solution is through dialogue and engagement with the
developers.
No monies have been collected via the derelict site tax in relation to the site.
The County Development Plan allows for the purchase of derelict sites. The
only value to be considered is the value of the site. This will represent a
short-term expense due to the demand for this site.
Queries were raised in relation to the status of the Corrib Hotel in Oughterard.
It was asked if the NOM could be deferred until legal clarity is received.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
There are several steps involved in acquisitions under the CPO process, one
of which includes engagement with the Derelict Sites Register.
This engagement is taking place and improvements have been carried out on
the site.
CPO is the last stage of this process. CPO occurs within the court system,
where a high burden of proof is required. This site is to be dealt with under
Derelict Sites legislation.
There was a Vacant Homes notice placed on the Corrib Hotel in Oughterard.
The owners engaged with the vacant homes team.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
The process under Derelict Sites legislation is in place and notices have been
served. He outlined that this process must be completed before any CPO
process is considered.
He stated that there is a budgetary implication associated with CPOs that will
need to be considered by the Members.
Comh./Cllrs. Maher, McHugh Farag, McClearn, Keane, Canning, Donohue and
Feeney raised the following points and queries:
Page 24 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Concern was raised regarding the open swimming pool on the site of the
Shannon Oaks Hotel.
It was suggested that this item be placed on the plenary agenda every quarter
to keep the Members updated.
The legislation to deal with these situations must be re-examined.
The situation will continue indefinitely if not addressed now.
It was asked what percentage of derelict sites are paying levies.
Fines should be imposed on the owners of the hotel instead of a CPO.
As of June 2025, there were only 5 properties on the Derelict Sites Register
and no monies recouped from them.
Revenue is tasked with recouping the monies. It was asked where the
recouped monies are allocated to and if it is the responsibility of the Council to
chase previous outstanding fines.
Could notice be issued to the owners to inform them that the Council will
initiate the legal process under the Derelict Sites legislation.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Additional staff resources have been allocated to address derelict sites. He
committed to completing the existing derelict sites enforcement process as
quickly as possible. He outlined that there are ongoing negotiations with the
owners.
A review will be carried out on the monies collected from derelict sites and a
report will be made to Members.
Prior to commencement of any CPO process, it is important that the CPO has
a solid planning policy platform and that the Council exhausts current notices
processes. He stated that he would advise Council to seek legal advice first.
The Members agreed that legal advice be sought on the matter. Cllr. McClearn also
requested legal advice be sought on the planning situation regarding the long term
rented accommodation units on the site.
Page 25 of 35
ITEM 17. NOTICE OF MOTION
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
4708
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
'That Galway County Council Chief Executive and Director of Services provide
confirmation that the Councils owned pothole patching machines are in perfect
working order in the 5 Municipal Districts. '
The following reply issued:
I refer and reply to your Motion relating to Patching Units.
'Galway County Council currently own and operate 4 no. Patching Units, they are
deployed across the Municipal Districts based on need.
All of the units are roadworthy and have passed their annual inspections. It is the
intention that 2 no. of the units will be replaced in 2026 — the units to be replaced are
approaching end of life. Financial provision has been made in this regard with a
Department of Transport grant available to help defray the cost. '
Cllr. Donohue asked which Municipal District (MD) did not own a Patching Unit.
Director of Services, Mr. Finn informed her that several lorries in the fleet have been
upgraded. The Patching Units are not allocated to a specific area but shared
between each MD. He added that it is intended to further upgrade the fleet, subject
to financial considerations.
ITEM 18. NOTICE OF MOTION
PROPOSED SECONDED
4709
Cllr. Regan submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
That Galway County Council make contact with Coillte to make a
financial contribution towards the local roads they are using.
These roads were never built to carry the weight of these trucks and trailers and are
doing untold damage to our local roads. '
Page 26 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Cllr. Regan spoke on his motion; he expanded that the Council are seeking extra
funding to repair local roads. There is no available budget to repair footpaths and the
cost of compensation paid by the Council was between €150-200,000 last year. Due
to the weight and number of Coillte vehicles, he is calling for them to make a
financial contribution towards the upkeep of the roads that they use. Cllr. McNamara
criticised the lack of response from Coiltte on other matters and indicated that he
was happy to support the motion.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. McNamara the above
motion was AGREED.
ITEM 19. NOTICE OF MOTION
4710
Cllr. Regan submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
'That Galway County Council build more one-off houses in rural areas. It's very
important to build a supply of one-off houses for applicants that have their own site,
keeping the people in their own area, from where they came from, also helping our
rural areas, schools and parishes that are in decline.
The following reply issued:
The Housing Capital Team predominantly delivers multi-unit developments to
address housing demand in our housing applicants specified areas of choice.
However, any proposed single rural house site location and its proximity to other
social housing developments, the applicant's area of choice, and the future use of
the proposed dwelling are all considered. The Housing Section also delivers a
program of Single Rural Houses, prioritising demand for specific categories, such as
disability, that have a necessity to be close to support networks.
Page 27 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Lee the above motion was
AGREED.
ITEM 20. NOTICE OF MOTION
4711
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
'That Galway County Council Chief Executive and Director of Services provide
confirmation that Galway County Council test and sample the material used in the
resuffacing the County Roads and the Roads Programme. '
The following reply issued:
Galway County Council are in compliance with the "Memorandum on Grants for
regional and local roads" and with all the associated Specifications. This is managed
under a number of different processes.
Procurement
All competitions ran for the supply and lay of roads materials include
adherence to all the required specifications where the tenders must
include copies of the relevant materials testing results. For the supply
of surface dressing chips, suppliers must submit recent, separate and
independently accredited Laboratory Test Results for several material
characteristics e.g. High Polished Stone Value (HPSV), Dust Content,
Grading, Flakiness Index and Aggregate Abrasion Value. Only
contractors who have materials in compliance qualify.
Suppliers must provide the following for aggregates for bituminous
mixtures and surface treatments for roads as required under the
Construction Products Regulations:
A certificate of conformity of the Factory Production Control
(FPC).
Page 28 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Declaration of Performance.
CE Certification to I.S. EN 13043:2013.
The notified certification body in these instances is generally the
(NSAI) who will have performed the initial inspection of the
manufacturing plant and of factory production control and undertake
continuous surveillance, assessment and evaluation.
Construction
Independent testing is arranged if deemed appropriate and random
sampling is also carried out to ensure compliance with the standards.
Contractors are also obliged to carry out quality control testing as
works progress and they are assessed as and when required.
Post -Construction
If there is any doubt in the quality of workmanship or materials further
independent testing may be carried out.
Cllr. Donohue acknowledged the detailed response to her Notice of Motion. She
questioned how the Council could verify if they were receiving value for money
without carrying out testing. Cllr. McHugh Farag added that testing should be carried
out continuouisly.
ITEM 21. NOTICE OF MOTION
4712
Cllr. Michael Leainde submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'That Galway County Council discuss the recently proposed regulations relating to
self-catering accommodation and the potential negative impact these measures may
have on tourism and on the local economy.
Page 29 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
Furthermore, that Galway County Council submit an application to the Department of
Enterprise, Trade and Employment seeking that the Galway Islands be granted an
exemption from these proposed regulations. This request is made in recognition of
the challenges facing the islands, including limited employment opportunities and
ongoing population decline, and the vital role that self-catering accommodation plays
in supporting tourism, sustaining small businesses and maintaining the viability of
Island communities. '
The following reply issued:
The Department of Enterprise, Tourism and Employment (DETE) is drafting Short-
Term Letting and Tourism (STLT) legislation to align with the STR Regulation, which
is expected to be published within the coming weeks and enacted in the coming
months, with the aim of having the provisions in place by 20 May 2026.
The introduction of the STLT legislation will provide a legal and administrative
framework to regulate short-term lettings, by providing the statutory basis for the
establishment of a register for short-term lets.
Comh./ Cllrs. Leainde and Thomas, raised the following points and queries:
The islands should be exempt from these regulations due to the short-term
nature of the tourism season and the limited options of places to stay on the
islands.
It was asked if the wording of motion could be amended.
Accommodation that does not comply with these regulations will be removed
from the Air BnB database by 20th May.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
• The legislation has not yet been published.
• It will only apply to accommodation in areas of populations over 20,000.
Page 30 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Comh. ICllrs. Thomas, Mannion, Welby and Leainde raised the following points
and queries:
Accommodation in areas of population less than 20,000 will have to meet the
requirements, but will be given 2 years to meet them.
Clarity is required on the matter.
The islands are a good test case to examine housing assessment numbers
alongside the number of short-term lettings.
There is a shortage of hotel rooms.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• He indicated that Galway County Council are awaiting the relevant legislation
from the Department/Government.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Thomas SECONDED by Cllr. Leainde the following
amended motion was PROPOSED.
I propose that we write to the minister for housing, Local Government and Heritage
Minister James Browne and ask him to contact and instruct Fäilte Ireland to allow
short term lettings to continue without planning in towns where the population is less
than 20,000 people and to instruct Airbnb to keep these premises on their
Callanderls also until such time as the government put the final policy in place in
relation to the short term letting. The reason for this is that even if someone was to
apply for planning now they would not be able to get the planning until after the cut
off date on May 20th and with no clear policy in place it is impossible for a local
authority to even grant a permission for short term letting
There should also be an exemption of planning for all existing short term letting
premises in all areas under the above populations. But they should be subject to
building or fire safety compliance.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Page 31 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M March 2026
Legislation will need to include provisions granting current users a grace
period to meet the new requirements.
Cllrs. Welby, Mannion and Thomas raised the following points and queries:
An engineer's report is currently sufficient for short-term let properties.
However, the proposed change may lead to some properties exiting the
short-term letting market without becoming available for long-term rental.
It was enquired if any applications have been received by the planning
department.
It was stated that Galway City Council have received applications in this
regard.
Concern was raised that Air BnB will remove properties from their sites that
do not comply from 20th May.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
Confirmed that applications cannot be accepted as the scheme is not yet
approved.
Applications lodged now would be considered under retention of planning
permission.
Galway City have a population of over 20,000, there are no settlements in the
County area of that size.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Thomas SECONDED by Cllr. Leainde the amended
motion was AGREED.
ITEM 22. CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
4713
The Cathaoirleach reminded the Members that the April Plenary meeting will
commence at lpm due to the holding of a Civic Reception after the meeting, at 6pm.
Page 32 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23'd March 2026
The Cathaoirleach outlined the programme of functions and events attended by
himself and the Chief Executive during their recent visit to Boston and New York. In
Boston, they met with the Irish Cultural Centre to strengthen Galway Diaspora
connections that will support Galway LEO companies seeking to expand into the
United States. Meetings were also held with the IDA in both Boston and New York,
as well as with Enterprise Ireland, to discuss Galway's strong economic performance
and its significant emerging opportunities. Potential avenues for future inward
investment were explored. The delegation also met with the Galway Association of
New York and participated in St. Patrick's Day events in the City. A full account of
the visit is provided in the Management Report. The Cathaoirleach informed
Members of the Social Economic Profile of Galway presented during the trip and
requested that it be circulated to all Members. He complemented the Executive for
the preparation of the report.
The Chief Executive highlighted the value of Galway's connections in Boston and
New York, emphasising their importance in supporting and advancing Galway
businesses and keeping vital connections with the Galway & Irish Diaspora living in
the USA.
The Cathaoirleach informed the Members that nominations for the Cathaoirleach
Awards that will take place on 7th May are open. He thanked Leas Cathaoirleach,
Cllr. Mary Hoade for deputising for him while he was out of the country.
Cllrs. Regan, Keane, Welby and Mannion raised the following points and
queries:
It was proposed that in relation to new planning exemptions, the size
allowable should be increased to 54m2 which would accommodation 2
bedrooms. The Council should write to the Minister before it is written into
legislation.
It was asked if plenary meetings could commence at 1 Oam.
The Members were informed and encouraged to sign a petition opposing
proposed mineral prospecting licences in the Maam area.
Page 33 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
He stated that the prosed legislation has not yet been issued by the
Department/Government.
Proposals to amend Standing Orders and in particular meeting start times,
should be made in writing to the County Secretary for consideration at CPG in
the first instance.
ITEM 23. VOTES OF SYMPATHY/CONGRATULATIONS.
A resolution of sympathy was extended to the following:
Kathleen Griffin, Main Street, Clifden, Co. Galway
Jane Rothwell, Dunlo hill, Ballinasloe, Co. Galway
Tara Keane, Caherlistrane, Co. Galway
Barbara Kavanagh, Suaimhneas, Killgi!l, Claregalway, Co. Galway
Padraig Lohan, Claggernagh East, Portumna, Co. Galway
Maura Bleakley, Fortland Meadows, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Angela Bane & Family, Fahy Gardens, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Aisling Maher, Kincullia, Loughrea, Co. Galway County
Mary Jo Kelly & Family, Abbey Street, Portumna, Co. Galway
Maria Flynn, Limehill, Tynagh, Co. Galway
Cllr. Declan Geraghty, Williamstown, via Castlerea, Co. Galway
Family of Ronnie & Joan Delaney, Carrickmines, Dublin
Family of Maureen Folan, Dåirin Darach, Lettermore, Co. Galway
Family of the Michael Lyster, Cabinteely, Dublin
Family of Alan McDonagh, Headford.
4714
Congratulations were extended to the following:
• Kieran Molloy who won the IBF European Welterweight Boxing
Championship.
Page 34 of 35
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd March 2026
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
Page 35 of 35
