Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Choiste Polásaí Straitéiseacha Pobail, An 
Ghaeilge, An Ghaeltacht, Turasóireachta & Comhtháthú a tionóladh 
Dé hAoine 20 Feabhra 2:00 ar líne trí Microsoft Teams 
 
   
Minutes of Meeting of the Community, Irish Language, Gaeltacht, 
Tourism & Integration Strategic Policy Committee held on Friday 
20th February @ 2:00pm via Microsoft Teams  
  
  
  
Members in Attendance online:  
 
Cllr Michael Leainde  
 
Galway County Council (chair) 
Cllr Evelyn Parsons 
 
 
Galway County Council   
Cllr Seamus Walsh 
 
 
Galway County Council   
Cllr Alan Harney 
 
 
Galway County Council  
   
Cllr Michael Regan 
Galway County Council   
Cllr Noel Thomas 
 
 
Galway County Council   
Colleen Baxter 
 
 
Business/Commercial Representative  
Paul Carey 
 
 
 
Development/Construction Representative  
 
Apologies: 
 
Cllr Máirtin Lee 
 
 
Galway County Council  
Chika Onyia 
 
 
 
Social Inclusion Representative  
Paul Dillon 
 
 
 
Community/Voluntary Representative  
 
  
  
Staff in Attendance:   
  
Michael Owens, Director of Service, Lorna Baek Senior Executive Officer, Sharon O’Grady 
Administrative Officer, Diane Gallagher A/SO, Jean Brann Senior Executive Officer, Marie 
Nicholson Administrative Officer, Marie Mannion Heritage Officer, Jennifer Swannock 
Administrative Officer, Elizabeth Keane County Librarian.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Welcome and Introductions  
  
  The chair welcomed everyone to the meeting and thanked them for their attendance. 
 
  
 
1. Adoption of Minutes   
  
The minutes of the last ordinary meeting of the SPC held on the 3rd of December 2025 were 
proposed by Cllr. Michael Leainde and seconded by Cllr Seamus Walsh.   
 
Matters arising: 
 
As requested by Cllr. Evelyn Parsons at the SPC meeting held on the 3rd of December Marie 
Mannion, Heritage Officer was invited to present to the members in relation to the Place 
Naming Committee. 
 
Michael Owens introduced Marie Mannion to present.  
 
Marie Mannion introduced herself and thanked the members for inviting her to present. Ms. 
Mannion gave an overview of the Place Naming Committee, the members on the committee 
and the work they do.  
 
Cllr. Leainde thanked Ms. Mannion for her presentation and opened the floor to 
questions/observations.  
 
Cllr. E Parsons thanked Marie for her presentation and queried how people can submit a 
request to the Committee. Cllr. Parsons stated that she would like to request that Eoghan 
O’Tuairisg’s name be incorporated into the naming of a property somewhere in his birth 
town of Ballinasloe.  
 
Ms. Mannion advised that Mr. O’Tuairisg’s name will be commemorated and used in a place 
name in an upcoming development in Ballinasloe and that she will advise Cllr. Parsons of the 
location once it has been confirmed.  
 
Cllr. Parsons queried if it would be possible to have an elected member on the Place Naming 
Committee.  
 
Ms. Mannion advised that this could be looked at and that she could discuss the addition of 
an elected member to the committee with her Director of Service.  
 
Cllr. Michael Regan queried whether there is an option of developers submitting possible 
names at planning application stage.  
 
Ms. Mannion advised that there is an option already in place for developers to submit place 
name suggestions at application stage but most do not do this.  
 

Cllr. Alan Harney thanked Marie for her presentation and concurred with Cllr. Parsons in 
relation to commemorating Eoghan O’Tuairisg in Ballinasloe.  
 
Cllr. Harney queried if the placing of a commemorative plaque would go through the Place 
Naming committee.  
 
Ms. Mannion advised that plaques do not go through the Place Naming committee but that 
she would work with any of the members who have a query in relation to the placing of a 
plaque.  
 
Cllr. Parsons queried if QR codes could be used in place of plaques. 
 
Ms. Mannion advised that a lot of caution would need to be taken if people are using QR 
codes in place of plaques and that information would need to be correct and updated.  
 
This concluded the presentation on the Place Naming Committee.  
 
 
2. An Post Commemorative Stamps.  
 
Cllr. Leainde introduce Michael Owens to give a short presentation on the An Post 
Commemorative Stamps Programme.  
 
Michael Owens gave a brief overview of the An Post proposal around commemorative stamps in 
2028. Mr. Owens advised that members can submit and submissions/suggestions they have by 
the 17th of April.  
 
Cllr. Michael Regan suggested that Joe Burke, musician, be put forward as a submission.  
 
Cllr. Parsons suggested that the founding of An Taibhdhearc would be a good suggestion but 
that they are City based.  
 
Michael Owens advised that he would engage with the City Council in relation to this 
suggestion.  
 
 
3. Proposed Amendment to the Standing Orders regulating proceedings and meetings 
of the Plenary Council 
 
Michael Owens introduced Jean Brann to give an overview of the proposed amendments to the 
Standing Orders regulating proceeding and meetings of the Plenary Council. 
 
Jean Brann introduced herself to the members and proceeded to give an overview of the 
proposed amendments to Standing Order number 76. Ms. Brann advised that the proposed 
amendments are now reflected in the Draft Standing Orders and that the proposed 
amendments would go to CPG and the full Plenary for approval after this SPC. 
 
The proposed amendments to were proposed by Cllr. Michael Leainde and seconded by Cllr. 
Evelyn Parsons.  
 

This concluded the presentation on the proposed amendment to Standing Orders regulating 
proceedings and meetings of the Plenary Council. 
 
4. Arts Plan scope and timeline update   
 
Michael Owens introduced Sharon O’ Grady, Arts Officer to give an update on the Arts Plan 
2026-2030. 
 
Sharon O’Grady thanked the members for inviting her to present to them on the Arts Plan. Ms. 
O’Grady gave an overview of the timelines for adoption of the plan and gave them information 
on the Consultant that has been engaged to help prepare the plan. Ms. O’Grady advised the 
members of the locations and dates of the public consultations and advised that she would 
welcome them to attend any of the consultations.   
 
Cllr. Leainde thanked Ms. O’Grady for her presentation and opened the floor to 
questions/observations. 
 
Cllr. Alan Harney thanked Ms. O’Grady for her presentation and stated that he had attended one 
of the early consultations and was surprised at how large a scope the Arts Office have. Cllr. 
Harney thanked Ms.O’Grady and all her team for the amount of work they do in the 
Communities in relation to Arts.   
 
Cllr. Harney stated that he would like the elected members to look at ways they could help 
promote the Arts Office more and make communities more aware of the opportunities available 
through the Arts Office.  
 
This concluded the Arts Plan presentation.  
 
5. Migrant Strategy scope and timeline update 
 
Michael Owens introduced Jennifer Swannock to give an update on the Migrant Strategy scope 
and timeline. 
 
Ms. Swannock introduced herself to the members and gave a brief overview of the timelines 
for adoption of the plan and gave them information on the Consultant that has been engaged to 
help prepare the plan. 
 
As there were no questions/observations in relation to the Migrant Strategy scope and timeline 
this concluded the presentation.  
 
6. Library Strategy scope and timeline update   
Michael Owens introduced Elizabeth Keane to give the members an update on the scope 
and timeline of the Library Strategy 
Ms. Keane thanked the members for inviting her to present to them. Ms. Keane informed 
the members of the timeline in relation to the Library Strategy. Ms. Keane outlined the key 
elements identified in the research done to date. Ms. Keane stated that one of the key 
elements identified was the issue of financial literacy. Ms. Keane advised the members that 

one service on offer in the libraries is the option of a 1:1 private engagement with a financial 
professional who can give members of the public advice/help on any issues they are having 
completing financial forms/material. Ms. Keane asked the members if they could help 
promote to the public that this service is available in libraries as it is not widely known in the 
community.  
Cllr. Michael Leainde thanked Ms. Keane for her presentation and opened the floor to 
questions/observations.  
Jennifer Swannock asked Ms. Keane if she would make contact with a group in Gort who 
would be interested in utilising this service. 
Ms. Keane stated that she would reach out to them.  
This concluded the Library Strategy update.  
7. Community Support Centre & Generators update 
 
Ms. Baek thanked the members for inviting her to present to them. Ms. Baek gave an update on 
the Community Support Centres and generators. Ms. Baek advised that to date 78 expressions 
of interest have been received and that the expressions of interest would be open on a rolling 
basis. Ms. Baek informed the members that to date 62 centres have been identified and are now 
listed on the Galway County Council website, they will also be published on the DOELG 
website.  
 
Ms. Baek advised that IT are currently working on a mapping system which will be used to 
identify the centres in future.   
 
Ms. Baek advised that 3 sites have been recommended to receive a mobile generator with 
expected delivery in May: 
 
• 
Clifden Town Hall 
• 
Seanscoil Sailearna 
• 
Dunmore Community Centre 
 
As there were no questions/observations in relation to the Community Support Centres this 
concluded the presentation.  
 
8. Drinking Bye-Laws Tuam 
 
Michael Owens introduced Marie Nicholson to give a presentation on the Draft Drinking Bye-
Laws. 
 
Ms. Nicholson introduced herself to the members and gave them an overview of the Draft 
Drinking Bye-Laws that have been created. Ms. Nicholson advised the members that the Bye-
Laws were created on a proposal that came through the Tuam Municipal District.  
 
 

 
Ms. Nicholson advised the members that the Bye-Laws would be adopted by the Tuam M.D.  
 
As there were no questions/observations in relation to the Draft Drinking Bye-Laws this 
concluded the presentation.  
 
 
9. Any Other Business  
 
• 
Michael Owens advised the members that they would be receiving an invite to attend 
the opening of Seachtain na Gaeilge which is taking place on Monday 23rd February in 
County Hall.  
 
• 
Mr. Owens informed the members that Galway have been successful in being chosen to 
host the National Famine Commemoration 2026 on May 17th, in co-operation with the 
workhouse in Portumna. Mr. Owens advised that the Commemoration would be 
televised and that a programme of events is to be drawn up to mark the occasion. Mr. 
Owens advised that invites would go out to the members to attend the Commemoration.  
 
 
The meeting concluded with no further questions raised. 
 
 
 
 
 
