Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at ARAS AN CHONTAE PROSPECT HILL
CATHAOIRLEACH:
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Monday. 23rd February 2026
Cllr. D. Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh. /Cllr. S. Broderick, J. Charity, D. Connolly, M
Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. Ö Curraoin, G. Donohue, P
Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty, T. Grealish,
Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade, C. Keane, D. Kelly, D
Killilea, P. Killilea, M. Kinane, M. Lee, E. Mannion, J
McClearn, S. McHugh Ryan, E. F. Parsons,
Reddington, M. Regan, N. Thomas, O. Turner, S
Walsh and T. Welby.
Comh. / Cllr. l. Canning, P. Keaveney, M. Leainde, P
Mac An Iomaire, M. Maher, K. McHugh Farag,
M.
McNamara,
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L. Hanrahan,
Director of Services, Mr. Michael Owens, Director of
Services, Mr. Uinsinn Finn, Director of Services, Ms.
E. Ruane, Director of Services, Ms. A. Fenton,
Financial Accountant, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. J. Brann Meetings Administrator, Ms.
L. Keady, A/Senior Executive Officer, Mr. M. O
Donnchadha, Oifigeach Forbartha Gaeilge, Ms. H.
Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. L. O'Donnell, Assistant
Staff Officer.
Page 1 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
The meeting commenced with the Members expressing their sympathies to Cllr.
Gerry King on the passing of his sister Anne, to Cllr. Ivan Canning on the passing of
his Uncle PJ Lynch, the family of the late Michael O'Neill former Galway County
Councillor, remembered as a trailblazer for his lifetime of community service and to
the family of the late Harry Collins, Galway County Council employee, who gave 55
years of service to the Council.
As a mark of respect, the meeting was adjoumed for 5 minutes.
ITEM NO.I CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
4675
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kelly SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan the minutes of
the Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 26th January were AGREED.
Members raised the following points and queries:
A suggestion was made that receptions be held in the foyer of County Hall
and not in front of the Chamber.
The Council were called upon to act to address a rat infestation in a derelict
house in Loughrea.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane
Committed to discussing the derelict house matter with Cllr. Regan following
the meeting.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 4676
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Comh. Mac An Iomaire the
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group held on 19th January 2026 were NOTED.
Page 2 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER THE AUDIT COMMITTEE'S 2025 ANNUAL REPORT
UNDER SECTION 15 LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AUDIT COMMITTEE)
REGULATIONS 2014.
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4677
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Feeney SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn the Audit
Committee 2025 Annual Report under section 15 Local Government (Audit
Committee) Regulations 2014 was NOTED.
ITEM NO.4 FILLING OF A CASUAL VACANCY ON THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
REGIONAL HEALTH FORUM WEST AND NORTH WEST.
4678
Report dated 10th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. P. Killilea it was AGREED
to appoint Cllr. Laurie Harney to the membership of the Regional Health Forum West
and North West.
Cllr, L. Harney thanked the Members for the nomination and looked forward to serving
on the committee, he confirmed his commitment to restoring maternity services at
Portiuncula Hospital.
ITEM NO. 5. TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF THE
LOCAL GOVERNMNET ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED)
4679
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. Regan, Parsons & Welby to attend LAMA Spring
Training Seminar at The Connaught Hotel, Old Dublin Road, Galway on 28th & 29th
January 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
Page 3 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Cllr. Lee it was AGREED to
authorise Cllrs. Mc Clearn, Hoade, Mc Hugh-Ryan & King to attend AILG February
Training Module — "From Policy to Practice: What Local Authorities in Ireland can
offer to support disabled people and an ageing population" at The Fairways Hotel,
Dundalk on 1 9th February 2026 (Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Walsh SECONDED by Cllr. Lee it was AGREED to
authorise Cllrs. Kinane & Maher to attend AILG February Training Module — "From
Policy to Practice: What Local Authorities in Ireland can offer to support disabled
people and an ageing population" at the Hotel Kilkenny on 21st February 2026
(Retrospective Approval).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn it was AGREED
to authorise Cllrs/ Comh. Cunniffe, Ö Curraoin, McHugh-Ryan, Kinane, D. Killilea, L.
Harney, King & Welby to attend the Association of Irish Regions Training Seminar
2026 at Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal on 25th & 26th February
2026.
on the PROPOSAL of Comh. Ö Curraoin SECONDED by Cllr. P. Killilea it was
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. Hoade & Donohue to attend AILG Annual Training
Conference 2026 at Hotel Minella, Coleville Road, Raheen, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary
on 22nd & 23rd April 2026.
ITEM NO. 6 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE TO AUTHORISE
THE ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE MEETINGS OTHER EVENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001 (AS AMENDED).
4680
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 4 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Donohue SECONDED by Cllr. L. Harney it was
AGREED to authorise Cllrs. Donohue, Parsons, Mannion, Hoade, Turner & L.
Harney to attend COPE Galway — Domestic Abuse Seminar at Galway County
Council Chambers on 12th February 2026. (Retrospective Approval).
ITEM NO. 7 TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF CONFERENCES
ATTENDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5F) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4681
Report dated 16th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting
on the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Comh. Ö Curraoin the
Summary of Proceedings at conference attended were NOTED.
ITEM NO. 8 TO APPROVE THE ATTENDANCE OF A DELEGATION FROM
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL TO ATTEND THE ST. PATRICK'S DAY
ENGAGEMENTS IN NEW YORK AND BOSTON AND ASSOCIATED BUSINESS
MEETINGS AND EVENTS.
4682
Report dated 17th February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty it was AGREED
to authorise the attendance of a delegation from Galway County Council to attend the
St. Patrick's Day engagements in New York and Boston and associated business
meetings and events.
ITEM NO. 9 TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - FEBRUARY 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001
(AS AMENDED).
4683
Report dated February 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 5 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Cllrs. Kinane, Keane, Reddington, McHugh Ryan, Cunniffe, Mannion & L.
Harney raised the following points and queries:
Further information and clarity were sought on the proposed wastewater
treatment plant for Craughwell and Clarenbridge.
Clarity was sought regarding the Active Travel works in Oranmore. Safety
concerns were raised around vehicular entry and exit of the estate.
It was asked that the National Transport Authority (NTA) be contacted to
review their specifications relating to Active Travel projects.
Alternative methods of informing the public of Section 38 works were
requested.
It was enquired if there is a plan and a budget for pothole maintenance.
It was asked if extra staff will be provided to manage the new 'Vacant Above
the Shop Grant.'
The 'Inclusive Triathlon Programme' and its partnership with Ability West and
the 'Her Moves Schools Programme' were welcomed.
The Equalisation Fund and Galway County Council's lack of funding must be
addressed to progress projects.
It was asked when the Active Travel scheme will be re-opened, as there are
no schemes in North Conamara.
An update was requested on the progress of the Ballinasloe Fire Station.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
A meeting was held last week between the Department of Housing & Local
Government, Uisce Éireann and the Council regarding the proposed
wastewater plant in Craughwell and Clarenbridge. It was a positive meeting
and an update on the project is included in the Management Report. He
undertook to update the Loughrea Municipal District when he has further
information.
Extensive hedge cutting works have been carried out.
As far as he is aware, the Safe Routes to School Scheme was opened last
year. The scheme is operated by An Taisce and the NTA. They provide the
Page 6 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Council with the list of works to be carried out. He undertook to follow up with
Cllr. Mannion.
While the contractor may not be on site in Oranmore at the moment, the
Active Travel works are still progressing. He will follow up with the Active
Travel Team.
The Council goes beyond statutorily requirements in carrying out Section 38
projects. The Council's online consultation portal receives a high volume of
submissions.
Loughrea Fire Station has been brought to tender for construction. The
Athenry Mechanics Workshop is progressing to Part 8 planning consent.
Galway City Fire Station is included in the capital programme and is currently
at the site selection and preliminary design stage. In addition, upgrade works
for the fire stations at Ballinasloe, Inis Mor and Portumna are included in the
current capital plan and will progress subject to funding approval.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
• Additional staff in the housing unit to administer the 'Vacant Above the Shop
Grant' will be sought. It will be looked at in the context of the workforce plan.
Cllrs./Comh. Geraghty, Mac An Iomaire, Feeney, D. Killilea, Hoade & Welby
raised the following points and queries:
It was asked that leniency be shown by the Environment section, to farmers
spreading slurry, due to the recent heavy rain.
Issues relating to road conditions, repeated potholes, and speeding outside
schools were highlighted.
The introduction of stage payments under the Croi Cönaithe grant was called
for.
The Part 8 planning notices for 2 affordable housing schemes in Athenry was
warmly welcomed.
Page 7 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23" February 2026
More Affordable Housing schemes are needed, and the grant must be
increased. Neither Letterfrack nor Clonbur have Local Area Plans, rural areas
must not be forgotten.
The works at Kilbannon National School were welcomed.
The launch of Seachtain na Gaeilge and upcoming programme of events was
welcomed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
At the Galway Housing Taskforce the Executive has sought increased
discretion within the Affordable Housing Scheme.
Discussions are taking place between the Department and Local Authorities
on introducing phased payments for the Croi C6naithe grant.
There will be Affordable housing schemes in each MD.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
• The Environment section works closely with farmers on a local level. She took
on board the comment on the amount of recent rain and added that water
quality must be maintained.
Cllrs. Regan, Parsons, Leainde, Donohue, D. Connolly, McClearn, Keaveney &
Kelly raised the following points and queries:
Funding for the repair of footpaths was called for.
Road pavements should be lower than the footpaths.
Installation of speed ramps at Kilrickle and Carrabane national schools was
welcomed. It was added that they should be present outside every school.
A Domestic Abuse refuge is required in the County.
The lack of Elected Member representation on the newly formed Outdoor
Recreation Team was noted. It was asked how Elected Members can engage
with the team.
Page 8 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
The change in the structure of the Regional Health Forum was highlighted.
This change will lead to the diminishing of local powers.
The recent COPE Domestic Abuse training was complimented.
Staffing levels in the Ballinasloe MD must be restored.
The Executive were congratulated on being one of only 3 Local Authorities
nationally to rezone land for residential development.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
• Acknowledged the urgency of providing a domestic refuge and confirmed that
the issue is being examined.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
National Oversight and Audit Commission indicators show that Galway
County Council performs above the national average in road condition
surveys. Our investment in hot-mix pothole repairs has contributed
significantly to this improvement.
The recent wet and cold weather has affected the condition of the roads. We
will write to the Department for an increase in funding for discretionary
spending for roads and footpaths.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
In line with our strategic workforce plan we are seeking to increase staffing
numbers, which have increased by over 90 from last year.
He thanked the Planning Team and Elected Members for passing of Variation
1 of the County Development Plan.
The Council is doing significant work in the provision of social, affordable and
cost rental housing and the CE acknowledged the work of the Housing Team.
ITEM NO. 10 CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE. 4684
Page 9 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 25.06.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Education and Youth — Resolution — Guidelines for Bus Drivers.
Letter dated 26.06.2025 from Niamh Kelly, School Transport Section,
Department of Education and Youth — Reply to Resolution letter dated
25.06.2025
Email dated 05.02.2026 to Niamh Kelly, School Transport Section,
Department of Education and Youth — Follow up email to Resolution Reply
dated 26.06.2025
Letter dated 24.09.2025 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution Letter —
Renewable Energy Development.
Letter dated 28.01.2026 from Eoin Colleary, Private Secretary to Minister of
State John Cummins — Reply to Resolution Letter — Renewable Energy
Development.
Letter dated 26.11.2025 to Minister Darragh O Brien, Department of Transport
— Resolution Letter — Dedicated Funding for Footpath Repair.
Email dated 21.01.2026 from Gordon Ryan, Private Secretary to Minister O
Brien, TD — Reply to Resolution Letter — Dedicated Funding for Footpath
Repair.
Letter dated 02.12.2025 from Galway County Council to all TDs — Resolution
Mercosur Trade Deal.
Email dated 20.01.2026 from Deputy John Connolly, TD — Reply to Resolution
Letter to all TDs — Mercosur Trade Deal.
Email dated 23.01.2026 from Aisling O Boyle Private Secretary to Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister McEntee — Reply to Resolution — Mercosur
Trade Deal.
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Commission for
Communication Regulation — Resolution — Issues with mobile phone
coverage.
Page 10 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Garrett Blaney, Chairperson, Commission for
Communication Regulation — Reply to Resolution — Issues with mobile phone
coverage.
Letter dated 16.12.2025 from Galway County Council to Mr. Patrick O
Donovan, Minister for Culture, Communications & Sport — Resolution — Issues
with Mobile Phone Coverage.
Letter dated 04.02.2026 from Darren Clarke, Private Secretary, Department of
Culture, Communications and Sport — Reply to Resolution letter — Mobile
phone issues.
Letter dated 15.01.26 from Sligo County Council — Resolution — ratify CETA
and the Investor Court System.
Letter dated 22.01.2026 from Offaly County Council — Resolution — Oppose
Mercosur Trade agreement.
Letter dated 22.01.2026 from Tipperary County Council — Resolution — E-
scooter and E-Bike Legislation
Letter dated 30.01.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution — Housing
for Older Person Grant.
Email dated 04.02.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage — Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter— Older Persons Grant.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Rural Water Unit,
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution — Extend
Deadline in funding for Measure A8.
Email dated 04.02.2026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage- Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter — Extend Measure A8 Funding.
Letter dated 03.02.2026 from Galway County Council to Mr. James Browne,
Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution — Increase in
Additional needs payment.
Email dated 04.022026 from Jack Savage, Private Secretary, Department of
Housing, Local Government and Heritage — Acknowledgement of Resolution
letter — Additional Needs payment.
Page 11 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Letter dated 10.02.2026 from Clare County Council — Resolution — Irish
Beekeepers.
Letter dated 10.02.2026 from Wexford County Council Resolution — Outlaw
the use of anonymous social media accounts.
Email dated 10.02.2026 from Wicklow County Council — Resolution
- CETA
and the Investor Court System.
Letter dated 17.02.2026 from Wexford County Council — Resolution — Irish
Public Bodies — Provision of Insurance.
Letter dated 20.02.23 from Galway County Council to Ms. Fiona Quinn,
Assistant Secretary, Local Government, Department of Housing, Local
Government and Heritage — Resolution — Request for increased Baseline
Funding for Galway County Council (GCC).
The CE and Mr. Owens reminded the Members that the deadline for submitting
Ethical Framework, Annual Declarations is Friday 28th February 2026.
Cllrs. L. Harney, Regan, Reddington, Geraghty, Cunniffe, McHugh Farag,
Welby & Hoade raised the following points and queries:
Disappointment was expressed at the correspondence received from
ComReg in response to a Notice of Motion from the Members, which is
included in the correspondence. There is a lack of accountability from the
sector.
Disappointment and lack of accountability from ESB was spoke of.
The condition of roads and footpaths following utility works was raised. The
responsibility and cost of repairs should not rest with the Council.
It was asked if any requirements, such as road opening licences, are placed
on utility companies when carrying out works.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Undertook to revert to ComReg on their response.
Page 12 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Where possible Galway County Council will assist the ESB to improve
network provision.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Finn:
• The Road Opening Licence system is fully online. It provides a level of
income. There is a new NOAC indicator for the number of inspections for road
opening licences. Currently, approximately half the licences are inspected.
There are exemptions for state agencies, however Uisce Éireann are included
in the system.
ITEM 11. QUESTION Cllr. Geraldine Donohue
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
To ask the Chief Executive has Galway County Council applied to Central
4685
Government for the funding required for the purchase, restoration and reopening of
Dunguarie Castle and to provide a copy of same.
The following reply issued:
Galway County Council has sought support from Central Government for the funding
required for the purchase, restoration, and reopening of Dunguaire Castle. The
Council has been in active contact with Government Departments, Ministers, the
OPW, Failte Ireland and the NPWS to progress the project, and a comprehensive
and evidence-based case was prepared highlighting the scale of restoration needs,
the strategic tourism value of the site, and the necessity of State financial support. All
relevant public and State bodies have been formally contacted, and the required
correspondence, including the Chief Executive's submissions, has been issued.
Galway County Council now awaits a positive response from the respective
Departments and agencies.
Page 13 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23'd February 2026
Overview
Galway County Council has undertaken extensive engagement with Government
Departments, Ministers, Failte Ireland, OPW and NPWS regarding the transfer,
restoration, and reopening of Dunguaire Castle.
Financial support has been sought by the Chief Executive from Central
Government, supported by technical, financial and operational documentation
prepared across Corporate Services, Tourism and Finance.
2. Comprehensive Timeline of Communications, Engagements and Key Actions
2023
2024
— Initiation of Feasibility Work
Galway County Council commenced formal consideration of Dunguaire Castle
as a potential acquisition and public tourism asset.
Initial engagement took place with procurement and technical advisers to
scope the due-diligence requirements necessary to assess the condition,
safety and viability of the asset prior to any transfer.
— Technical Due Diligence, Statutory Engagement and Early External Queries
January — February 2024
Galway County Council commissioned a comprehensive suite of external
technical reports, including building condition surveys, structural and
engineering assessments, fire safety reviews and preliminary cost estimates.
• These reports confirmed that significant capital investment would be required
to address structural, safety and compliance issues prior to any reopening.
February — March 2024
Galway County Council responded to external tourism and public enquiries
regarding the reopening of Dunguaire Castle, confirming that the Castle
remained closed and that reopening was contingent on completion of due
diligence, securing funding and resolving ownership matters.
Page 14 of 30
April —
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M February 2026
Engagement took place with external tourism bodies and local authority
counterparts to inform operational and comparative assessment.
June 2024
Galway County Council initiated engagement with planning, heritage and
conservation stakeholders, including internal heritage and planning functions,
to confirm statutory obligations associated with works to a protected structure
and national monument.
Early consideration was given to requirements for Ministerial Consent and
engagement with National Monuments authorities.
Late 2024 Development of Funding Case and Government Engagement
November 2024
Galway County Council engaged Grant Thornton to prepare a Funding
Requirement Memo, setting out:
Capital restoration costs
o
Operational projections
Cash-flow requirements
Long-term sustainability considerations
o
• This document formed a core element of the evidence base supporting
requests for State funding.
December 2024
• Galway County Council prepared briefing materials and draft correspondence
for engagement with Government Departments, outlining:
The national and regional significance of Dunguaire Castle
The scale of deterioration and risk associated with continued closure
o
The inability of the Council to proceed without Government capital
support
2025 — Escalation of External Engagement and Political Support
May - July 2025
Page 15 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Galway County Council engaged directly with Shannon Group / Shannon
Airport Group, the current owners of Dunguaire Castle, regarding:
The conditions and feasibility of transfer
o
The urgency expressed by Shannon Group in progressing a resolution
The risks associated with delay or alternative disposal
o
A site visit was undertaken involving senior GCC officials to assess access,
safety and condition issues.
July 2025
Galway County Council issued formal correspondence to Central Government
seeking capital funding support for the restoration and reopening of Dunguaire
Castle.
This correspondence explicitly stated that, without Government funding,
Galway County Council would not be in a position to proceed with acquisition
or works.
November 2025
A full schedule of records was compiled, including all external
correspondence, technical reports and funding documentation.
Elected members were provided with factual updates and, where appropriate,
access to due-diligence material on a confidential basis.
December 2025
Galway County Council attended a Ministerial-level meeting with the
Department of Enterprise, Tourism and Employment.
The meeting acknowledged the strategic importance of Dunguaire Castle and
the scale of capital funding required.
Follow-up actions included preparation of formal submissions and requests for
inter-agency support.
Post-meeting correspondence issued by Galway County Council thanked
Ministers and officials and reiterated the Council's funding position.
Page 16 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
2026 — Formal Chief Executive Submissions and Democratic Reporting
January 2026
The Chief Executive of Galway County Council issued formal correspondence
to:
The Office of Public Works (OPW)
The National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS)
o
These letters sought formal support for the acquisition, restoration and
reopening of Dunguaire Castle and requested engagement on potential
funding and statutory pathways.
3. Detailed Review of External Correspondence Seeking Support
Galway County Council has consistently and formally sought external support for the
Dunguaire Castle project. All correspondence was grounded in technical, financial
and operational evidence and issued at senior management or Chief Executive level.
Support sought included:
Capital funding for restoration and compliance works
Political and departmental support to progress inter-agency coordination
Statutory and technical engagement with OPW and NPWS
4. Table of External Correspondence Issued by Galway County Council
Date Issued
13 Nov 2024
Issued By
Jacqueline
Carroll,
Director of
Services,
GCC
Recipient
Government
Departments
(via draft
"Letter to
Government")
Purpose of
Correspondence
Response /
Current Status
Draft finalised
Preparation and circulation
and prepared
of formal funding request
for issue;
letter seeking State capitai
subsequent
support for the acquisition,
CE-level
restoration and reopening
issuance
of Dunguaire Castle
followed
Page 17 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
17 Dec 2024
13 Dec 2024
19 Feb 2025
17 Feb 2025
July 2025
Jacqueline
Carroll,
Director of
Services,
GCC
Jacqueline
Carroll,
Director of
Services,
GCC
Jacqueline
Carroll,
Director of
Services,
GCC
Jacqueline
Carroll,
Director of
Services,
GCC
Galway
County
Council
Office of An
Taoiseach (via
John Kelly)
Chief
Executive (for
onward issue
to An
Taoiseach)
Sean Canney,
Government /
Féilte Ireland
context (reply
drafted for CE)
Central
Government /
Relevant
Departments
Direct request for An
Taoiseach's support to
secure €5.18m State
funding for Dunguaire
Castle; submission of full
funding documentation
and invitation to visit site
Drafting and
recommending formal
submission to An Taoiseach
following confirmation that
the Department of
Housing, Local Government
and Heritage had no
available funding stream
Request for political
support and assistance in
securing Government
funding; attached business
case previously submitted
to relevant Departments;
request for meeting
Formal acknowledgement
that GCC is seeking
national funding;
confirmation that transfer
cannot proceed without
State capital support;
reference to potential
Fåilte Ireland capital
programme as fallback
Formal request for capital
funding support to enable
acquisition, restoration and
reopening of Dunguaire
Castle
Email issued; no
written
response on
record at time
of review
CE approval
process
referenced;
subsequent
submission
issued
Email issued;
meeting sought;
no positive
funding
response
recorded at
time of issue
Position
articulated; no
confirmation of
funding support
recorded
Acknowledged;
matter
progressed to
further
engagement
Page 18 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
16 Dec 2025
Dec 2025
(post-meeting)
22 Jan 2026
22 Jan 2026
Ongoing 2024—
2025
Galway
County
Council
Director of
Services,
GCC
Chief
Executive,
GCC
Chief
Executive,
GCC
Galway
County
Council
Minister for
Enterprise,
Tourism &
Employment
(meeting)
Department of
Enterprise,
Tourism &
Employment
Director
General,
NPWS
Office of
Public Works
(OPW)
Fåilte Ireland
Presentation of funding
case and strategic
justification
Written follow-up
confirming funding request
and agreed actions
Request for support for
acquisition and restoration
of Dunguaire Castle
Request for OPW
engagement and support in
progressing the project
Engagement regarding
potential visitor experience
and tourism supports
and Ministerial
meeting
Positive
engagement;
support
acknowledged;
follow-up
actions agreed
Awaiting formal
written
response
Issued;
response
awaited
Issued;
response
awaited
Indicative
support
expressed; no
financial
commitment
confirmed
5. Current Position
Galway County Council has completed extensive due diligence and external
engagement in relation to Dunguaire Castle.
Formal requests for State funding and agency support have issued.
The Council is awaiting formal responses from Government Departments and
State bodies.
Galway County Council will continue to engage proactively to progress the
project, subject to securing the necessary funding.
Cllr. Donohue asked why there was no correspondence between 2021 and the
closure of Dunguaire Castle in 2023. She noted that the Dunguaire Castle website
Page 19 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meetmg held 234 February 2026
references Galway County Council. No funding has been set aside in the National
Development Plan for the Castle.
Cllr. P. Killilea added that he attended a recent meeting with Minister Burke, Fåilte
Ireland, the Chief Executive, Director of Services Mr. Owens and Oireachtas
Members, at which Minister Burke gave a commitment on the future of the castle.
The Chief Executive stated that the correspondence as provided by Mr. Owens
shows the work that has taken place to date. The Members will be notified as soon
as there is an update.
ITEM 12. NOTICE OF MOTION
4686
Cllr. Karey McHugh Farag submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'Galway County Council calls on the Government to amend the Israeli Settlements in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Prohibition of Importation of Goods) Bill to
include the prohibition of trade in service.
The inclusion of services is in accordance with the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and the Resolution which Ireland co-sponsored at the
United National General Assembly.
Furthermore, this Council urges the Government to enact the legislation in full before
the end of Spring 2026.
Cllr. McHugh Farag spoke on her motion, thanking the Local Palestinian Action
Group for the work they have carried out. She explained that trade in services should
be prohibited along with that of goods.
Cllrs. Kelly, McClearn, Leainde, D. Connolly, Geraghty supported Cllr. McHugh
Farag's motion. Cllr. D. Connolly outlined that while Comh. Ö Curraoin had left the
meeting momentarily, he had also indicated that he was in support of the said
motion. It was asked that the delegation travelling to New York raise this issue during
their trip and that the motion be copied to the Oireachtas Members.
Page 20 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McHugh Farag SECONDED by Cllr. Kelly the above
motion was AGREED.
ITEM 13. NOTICE OF MOTION
4687
Cllr. Declan Kelly submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'That Galway County Council Executive write to the Minister for Housing and ask that
the new guidelines on modular homes be expedited, as many families are contacting
Councillors as to where it is at'.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Kelly SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty the above motion
was AGREED.
ITEM 14. NOTICE OF MOTION
Cllr. Alan Harney submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
4688
'That Galway County Council notes the importance of protecting and enhancing the
character and appearance of Architectural Conservation Areas (ACAs), and reaffirms
the role of the Shopfront Design Guide, produced by the Regeneration Team in 2023
in achieving this objective.
This Council should proactively engage with business owners and occupiers within
ACAs to encourage awareness of, and compliance with, the Shopfront Design
Guide, including the provision of guidance and advice where appropriate.
Furthermore, where such engagement does not result in compliance, that this
Council examines and, where necessary, pursues appropriate enforcement options
under the Planning and Development Acts to address non-compliant shopfronts, in
order to protect the architectural and visual integrity of ACAs".
Page 21 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
The following reply issued:
Galway County Council is committed to protecting and enhancing the character and
appearance of the Architectural Conservation Areas (ACA's). The below policy
objectives in the County Galway Development Plan 2022-2028 commits to this.
AH 1 Architectural Heritage
Ensure the protection of the architectural heritage of County Galway which is a
unique and special resource, having regard to the policy guidance contained in the
Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines 2011 (and any updated/superseding
document).
AH 4 Architectural Conservation Areas (Refer to Appendix 7)
Protect, conserve and enhance the special character of the Architectural
Conservation Areas (ACA) included in this plan through the appropriate
management and control of the design, location and layout of new development,
modifications, alterations or extensions to existing structures, surviving historic plots
and street patterns and/or modifications to the character or setting of the
Architectural Conservation Area. Works within the ACA shall ensure the
conservation of traditional features and building elements that contribute to the
character of the area. The special character of an area includes its traditional
building stock and material finishes, spaces, streetscape, shop fronts, landscape and
setting. New proposals shall have appropriate regard to scale, plot, form, mass,
design, materials, colours and function.
This will be achieved by;
(a) Protecting all buildings, structures, groups of structures, sites, landscapes and all
features which contribute to the special character of the ACA from demolition and
non-sympathetic alterations.
(b) Promote appropriate and sensitive reuse and rehabilitation of buildings and sites
within the ACA.
Page 22 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
(c) Ensure new development within or adjacent to an ACA respects the established
character of the area and contributes positively in terms of design, scale, setting and
material finishes to the ACA.
(d) Promote high-quality architectural design within ACAs.
(e) Seek the repair and reuse of traditional shopfronts and where appropriate,
encourage new shopfronts of a high-quality architectural design.
(f) Ensure that all new signage, lighting, advertising and utilities to buildings within
ACA are designed, constructed, and located in such a manner that they do not
detract from the character of the ACA.
(g) Protect and enhance the quality of open spaces within ACAs and ensure the
protection and where necessary reuse of street furniture and use of appropriate
materials during the course of public infrastructure schemes within ACAs.
(h) Prohibit development proposals, either in whole or in part for the demolition of a
structure within an Architectural Conservation Area that contributes to the special
character of the area.
(i) Protect structures in ACAs from non-sympathetic alterations and encourage
appropriate infill developments.
(j) Works materially affecting the character of a protected structure or the exterior of
a building/ structure within an ACA will require planning permission;
(k) Any works carried out to a protected structure or the exterior of a
building/structure within an ACA shall be in accordance with best conservation
practice and use sustainable and appropriate materials.
(l) Ensure that any development, modifications, alterations, or extensions materially
affecting the character of a protected structure, or a structure adjoining a protected
structure, or a structure within or adjacent to an Architectural Conservation Area
(ACA), is sited and designed appropriately and is not detrimental to the character or
setting of the protected structure or of the ACA.
In line with the policy objectives above, Galway County Council will commit to
engaging with the business community with respect to encouraging the
enhancement of the ACA's and will empower such business communities to
Page 23 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23/0 February 2026
enhance and develop their business to the benefit of the built heritage in towns and
villages across the County.
Cllr. A Harney spoke on his motion, he is concerned in instances where new
businesses do not conform to the requirements of the Shopfront Design Guide,
especially in Architectural Conservation Areas.
Cllrs. Feeney, Geraghty, L. Harney & Regan raised the following points and
queries:
Noted that not all architectural buildings can be preserved. The guidelines
should not inhibit good development.
Concerns were raised about the potential loss of rates revenue when
short-term businesses close and subsequently reopen in different locations.
Information on unpaid rates was requested.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
A balanced and reasonable approach will be taken in relation to this issue.
It is the responsibility of the owner of the building to notify the Local Authority
in relation to rates. The Council are proactive in this area. We receive
information from Revenue and our Revenue Collectors.
He will revert to Cllr. Regan on his query regarding rate collection. The
collection rates of the Council are very good, we lie in the top half in the
NOAC Indicators.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. A. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Turner the above motion
was AGREED.
ITEM 15. NOTICE OF MOTION
4689
Cllr. Evelyn Parson submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
Page 24 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
'That this Council call upon Government to enact legislation to systematically,
sustainably and steadily increase the provision of Irish-medium education so that
future generations of Irish children will have the opportunity to be educated through
their national language, if they so desire.
Further, that this Council-
Requests that this motion be circulated to the Minister for Education, the Taoiseach,
the Minister for the Gaeltacht, all Oireachtas members in the constituency, and the
other local authorities for their information.
Rün:
Go n-iarrann an Chomhairle seo ar an Rialtas reachtaiocht a achtü chun a chinntiü
go mbeidh an deis cheart ag glünta päisti agus teaghlaigh amach romhainn
oideachas tri mheän na Gaeilge a fhäil ina dteanga näisiünta féin, mäs mian leo é.
Ina theannta sin, iarrann an Chomhairle seo go seolfar an rün seo chuig an Aire
Oideachais, an Taoiseach, Aire na Gaeltacht, agus gach ball den Oireachtas sa
däilcheantar, agus chuig na hüdaräis äitiüla eile mar eolas döibh'.
Cllr. Parsons added that plans need to be put in place now to increase opportunities
for children to be educated in their national language. The revival of the Welsh
language is a prime example of how successful this can be.
Cllrs. Donohue, Mannion, L. Harney and Hoade spoke on the motion and added that
the Chamber should lead by example in the use of Gaeilge.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Parsons SECONDED by Cllr. Donohue the above
motion was AGREED.
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
4690
Cllr. Måirtin Lee submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the meeting:
Page 25 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
'Té mé ag moladh go cuirfidh Comhairle Contae na Gaillimhe litir ag MARA, maidr leis na
hiarratais atå deanta chun Ceadunais chun feamainn a bhaint sna cladaigh ar chösta
Contae na Gaillimhe, ag insinnt döibh go bhfui/ cearta bainnte feammaine ag förmhör
mhuinitir na haite sna gceantair ina bhfuil siad ag deanamh iarratas iontü. larraimid ar MARA
breithniü cui a dhéanamh ar na cearta seo sula gcinnfear na hiarratais agus aird a thabhairt
ar na gnåthchearta seanbhunaithe agus cearta priobhäideacha seo atä ag muintir na håite
chun feamainn a bhaint.
I am recommending that Galway County Council write to MARA, regarding the
applications made for Licences to harvest seaweed on the shores of County Galway,
informing them that the majority of the local people in the areas where they are
applying for consent have seaweed harvesting rights. We call on MARA to give due
consideration to these rights before determining the applicaitons and have regard to
the long established and customary and private sea weed harvesting rights of the
local people. '
Cllrs./Comh. Lee, Keane, D. Connolly, O Curraoin, Thomas, Mannion, Mac An
Iomaire, Welby, L. Harney & Kinane raised the following points and queries:
Local seaweed farmers have been farming for hundreds of years without
causing detrimental effect to the environment.
If allowed, this could in time affect all the County's coastline.
Mairéad Farrell, TD has raised this issue in the Dåil.
There have been public meetings and the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority
(MARA) must take on board the views of the seaweed farmers.
The licence applications should be withdrawn and the current system should
remain in place.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Keane the above motion was
AGREED.
ITEM NO. 17 CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
4691
Page 26 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
The Cathaoirleach drew the attention of the Members to the calendar of events as
previously circulated that are taking place for Seachtain na Gaeilge.
The following motion was PROPOSED by Cllr. Cunniffe SECONDED by Cllr.
Thomas:
'We propose that Larry Murrin stand-down from his position within Bord Bia
Organisation; as double standards are not acceptable when the focus should be on
Irish produce. '
Cllrs. Cunniffe, Thomas, Finnerty, Reddington, Kelly, McClearn, Geraghty,
Welby, Hoade, D. Connolly, Kinane, Keane & M. Connolly raised the following
points and queries:
A Chairperson must uphold and enshrine the values of a company.
There is a direct conflict of interest in this case.
Removing him from office will not address the problems that Irish farmers
face, such as CAP post 2027 and LEADER programme.
Irish farmers are subject to extensive inspection requirements and continue to
produce top-quality produce
Dialogue and negotiation are needed to address these issues. Disputes
cannot be resolved without dialogue.
Traceability and honesty are needed. Consumers are trying to buy and
support Irish produce. It is not acceptable that imports display the Irish flag.
Faith in the Bord Bia logo is lost.
This motion has been passed at the Ballinasloe MD. Confidence needs to be
restored.
Of the 15 members of the Bord Bia board, 12 voted in confidence of the
Chairperson. The views of the board must be respected.
Bord Bia is about food production not solely farmers.
A counter motion was PROPOSED by Cllr- McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Hoade:
'l propose that Galway County Council write to all parties concerned, Farm
Organisations, Bord Bia, and the Minister for Agriculture, to convene an urgent
Page 27 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
meeting to instigate dialogue and a clear process to resolve the existing
impasse. This is required to protect farm incomes, the integrity of Bord Bia, the
future CAP Negotiations and their impact on communities.
The current Bord Bia Farm inspection regime also needs to be examined. '
A discussion took place in the Chamber with regard to the counter motion, as put
forward by Cllr. McClearn. Members expressed their concerns as to whether it
should be considered as a new motion or a counter motion. In accordance with
Standing Orders the Cathaoirleach confirmed that he was dealing with it as a counter
motion and that it was being taken first and that he was putting it to a vote.
A vote was taken on the counter motion.
The following was the result:
For 24
Cllr. S. Broderick
Cllr. M. Connolly
Cllr. G. Finnerty
Cllr. L. Harney
Cllr. D. Killilea
Comh. Ac an Iomaire
Cllr. S. McHugh Ryan
Cllr. M. Regan
Aqainst 2
Comh. Ö Curraoin
Abstain I No Vote 12
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
J. Charity
G. Donohue
T. Grealish
M. Hoade
P. Killilea
E. Mannion
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr. Dr. E. F. Parsons
O. Turner
K, McHugh Farag
D. Collins
A. Harney
C. Keane
M. Lee
J. McClearn
A. Reddington
T. Welby
Page 28 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23rd February 2026
Cllr.
D. Connolly
Cllr. D. Kelly
Cllr.
N. Thomas
Cllr.
l. Canning
Cllr.
M. Leainde
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
Cllr.
S. Cunniffe
M. Kinane
S. Walsh
P. Keaveney
M. Maher
Cllr. D. Geraghty
Cllr. M. McNamara
As per the result of the vote, the County Secretary deemed the motion as carried
and it was adopted.
The following motion was PROPOSED by Comh. Mac An Iomaire SECONDED by
Cllr. Reddington:
'That Galway County Council writes to The Minister for Housing, Local Government
and Heritage and ask for the
The implementation of a phased payment system for the Croi Cönaithe (Towns)
Fund Scheme. '
On the PROPOSAL of Comh. Mac An Iomaire SECONDED by Cllr. Reddington the
above motion was AGREED.
Cllrs. Thomas, Kelly & Grealish raised the following points and queries:
Concerns were expressed regarding the lack of regulation governing solar
farms.
It was asked if the renewable energy status section of the County
Development Plan can be reviewed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• There is provision to vary the County Development Plan under Section 13 of
the Planning and Development Act. The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) have issued guidelines regarding lithium battery storage and the
Page 29 of 30
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 23M February 2026
Council adhere to these guidelines. The Amendment or Variation of a County
Development Plan is a Reserved Function of the Members.
ITEM NO. 18 VOTES OF SYMPTAHY/CONGRATULATIONS.
Siobhån O Neill, Tully, Renvyle, Co. Galway
Paraic Lowery, Tiernea, Cornamona, Galway
Michael Kane, Mullaghgloss, Renvyle, Co. Galway
4692
Esther, Denny, Declan, Donnacha & Marie Flaherty, Waterdale, Claregalway,
Co. Galway.
Robyn & Theo O Brien C/O Esther & Denny Flaherty, Waterdale,
Claregalway, Co. Galway
Theresa, Eoin, Adam, Lisa & Bronagh Kelly, Lydacan, Oranmore, Co. Galway.
Damian McGrath, Church Street, Gort, Co. Galway
Pat Kearney & Niamh Kearney, Maree Road, Oranmore, Co Galway
Cllr. Gerry King, Errislannan, Clifden, Co. Galway
Linda Ni Chonchubhair, Leitirmöir, Co. na Gaitlimhe
Michael Collins, Terryland, Co. Galway
Padraig Lohan, Claggernagh East, Portumna, Co. Galway
Nora McHugo, Feagh, Duniry, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Edward Corban, Shragh, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Anne Marie Seymour, Upperforge, Woodford, Co. Galway
Kieran Fahey, Barrack Street, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Pat & Mary Quinn, Dunkellin Street, Loughrea, Co Galway
The Family of PJ Lynch, Toomard, Newbridge, Co. Galway
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
23 -
Page 30 of 30