Min.March1.2026 
 
Minutes of Proceedings at Meeting of Cork County Council held in the Council Chamber, County 
Hall, Cork and by Microsoft Teams on Monday 9th March 2026 
 
I LATHAIR 
         Leas Comhairleoir Séan Ó Dubhghaill, Méara Chontae. 
Comhairleoiri:  
Uí Bhambaire, Ó Colmáin, Ó Coileáin S, Uí Chochláin G, Ó Foghlú, Uí Shúilleabháin M, Ó Coileáin 
D, Ní Chróinín, Ó hArrachtáin, Mac Giolla, Uí Bhuachalla A, Daltún, Ó Suilleabháin, Donnabháin, Ó 
Fathaigh, Ní Charthaigh Ú, De Faoite, Barra, Mac Iorlla, Ó Finn, Ní Cheallacháin, Rasmussen, 
Sheppard, Mac Coitir, Dawson, Ó Donnchú, Ó Floinn, Ó Laoghaire, De Brún, Ó Dubhghaill, Ó 
Muineacháin B, Ní Murchú T, Ó Cochláin M, Ó Luanaigh, Ó Luasa, Ui Loinsigh, Ní Mhuineacháin 
G, Ó Haodha, Ó Madaoin, Ó Múrchú G, Ó Sé T, Ó Síocháin, Ní Heachthigheirn, Ó Buachalla S, 
Cocking, Ó Hargáín, Ó Maolchathaigh, Ó Cearbhaill, Ní Cheallaigh, NÍ Charthaigh, Ó Seasnáin, 
Towse 
Leithscéalta: Uí Bhriain, Ó Héigheartaigh, Léineacháin Ui Foghlú, 
 
PRESENT  
 
 
             Councillor Ian Doyle, Deputy Mayor, presided. 
Councillor:  
Bambury, Coleman, Collins J, Coughlan G, Foley, O’Sullivan M, Collins D, Cronin, Harrington, Gill, 
Buckley A, Dalton-O’Sullivan, Donovan, Fahy, McCarthy U, White, Barry, Curley, Finn, O’ Callaghan, 
Rasmussen, Sheppard, Cotter, Dawson, O’Donoghue, O’Flynn, O’Leary, Browne, Doyle, Moynihan B, 
Murphy T, Coughlan M, Looney, Lucey, Lynch, Moynihan G, Hayes, Madden, Murphy G, O’Shea T, 
Sheehan, Ahern, Buckley J, Cocking, Horgan, Mulcahy, Carroll, Kelly, McCarthy B, Sexton, Towse 
Apologies: O’Brien, Hegarty, Linehan Foley 
S/Chief Executive, Assistant Chief Executive, S/Assistant Chief Executive, S/Director of Services, 
Corporate Services, S/Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services. 
 
 
[a] 
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES 
 
DEIMHNIÚ MIONTUAIRISCÍ 
1/3-1 
Proposed by Councillor Anthony Barry  
            Seconded by Councillor Kay Dawson  
        
RESOLVED:  

Min.March1.2026 
That the minutes of the Special Meeting for the late Cllr. Michael Creed held on February 
17th, 2026 confirmed and signed by the Mayor. 
Proposed by Councillor Michael Looney  
            Seconded by Councillor Martin Coughlan  
        
RESOLVED:  
That the minutes of the Meeting held on February 23rd, 2026 confirmed and signed by the 
Mayor. 
[b] 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
2/3-1 
TO: Sean Troy on the passing of his wife Kay Troy 
TO: To Cllr Deirdre Kelly on the passing of her uncle Michael Kelly  
TO:  To the family of the late Rev. Father Patrick Barry 
 
[c] 
STATUTORY BUSINESS 
 
GNÓ REACHTÚIL 
 
SECTION 48 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         3/3-1 
 
Nominations the Tourism Strategic Policy Committee and LCDC from sectoral interest. 
Proposed by Gearoid Murphy 
Seconded by Anthony Barry  
 
[e] 
REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEES 
 
TUAIRISCÍ AGUS MOLTAÍ Ó CHOISTÍ 
 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP 
                     4/3-1 
CONFERENCE & TRAINING LIST 
                 4(a)/3-1 
Approval of attendance by Members at Conferences/Training on the Conference list for 
March.  
Proposed by Cllr. Gearoid Murphy  
Seconded by Cllr. Anthony Barry  
 
CIVIC RECEPTIONS 
                 4(b)/3-1 
Approval of Civic Reception to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the founding of Cork 
Federation ICA. 

Min.March1.2026 
 Proposed by Cllr. Gearoid Murphy 
Seconded by Cllr. Alan Coleman  
 
CORK CITY SPORTS  
                 4(c)/3-1 
Approval of funding of €20,000 for the 72nd Cork City Sports.  
 Proposed by Cllr. Cathal Rasmussen 
Seconded by Cllr. Michael Looney 
 
APPROVAL OF TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR CORK CITY AND COUNTY COMMITTEE 
                 4(d)/3-1 
Approval of the Terms of Reference for Cork City and County Committee 
 Proposed by Cllr. Gearoid Murphy  
Seconded by Cllr. Anthony Barry  
 
MATTER REFERRED TO AND CONSIDERED AT CPG REGARDING WEBCASTING FACILITIES. 
                 4(e)/3-1 
Elected Members of the CPG considered the motion and agreed that the current system which 
allows public access to meetings in person and through Microsoft teams continues. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Cathal Rasmussen 
Seconded by Cllr. Michael Looney 
 
Cllr Peter O’Donoghue requested a vote was taken on the recommendation, seconded by Cllr 
Ger Curley. The Deputy Mayor called for a vote which resulted as follows: 
 
FOR: 
  
Councillors: Coleman, Collins J, Foley, O’Sullivan M, Collins D, Cronin, Harrington, Gill, Buckley A, 
Dalton-O’Sullivan, Donovan, Fahy, McCarthy U, Barry, Finn, O’ Callaghan, Rasmussen, Sheppard, 
Cotter, Dawson, O’Flynn, O’Leary, Browne, Doyle, Moynihan B, Murphy T, Coughlan M, Looney, 
Lucey, Lynch, Hayes, Madden, Murphy G, O’Shea T, Sheehan, Ahern, Cocking, Mulcahy, Carroll, 
Kelly, McCarthy B 
 
 
[40] 
AGAINST:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bambury, Curley, O’Donoghue, Buckley J, Horgan, Sexton, Towse 
  [7] 
The Deputy Mayor declared the recommendation as carried. 
 
 
[f] REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF OFFICERS 
     TUAIRISCÍ AGUS MOLTAÍ Ó OIFIGIGH 
 
2026 ARTS GRANTS SCHEME 

Min.March1.2026 
         5/3-1 
Presentation of the 2026 Arts Grants Scheme 
Proposed by Cllr. Anthony Barry   
Seconded by Cllr. Finbarr Harrington 
 
[g] CORRESPONDENCE FROM GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS 
          6/3-1 
CCTV 
Correspondence received dated 29/01/2026 from Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and 
Migration, Jim O’Callaghan TD in relation to CCTV. 
 
Members noted the correspondence from the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and 
Migration, Jim O’Callaghan TD  
 
          7/3-1 
CATALPA SIX  
Correspondence received dated 29/01/2026 from Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and 
Migration, Jim O’Callaghan TD in relation to the Catalpa Six. 
Members noted the correspondence and requested that Cork County Council respond to the 
Minister for Justice, Home Affairs & Migration to request clarity on the requirements/process 
to be met in order to submit an application seeking a presidential pardon for the Catalpa Six 
and ask that the Minister expedites the process for providing pardons.  
 
          8/3-1 
HOME HELP WAITING LISTS 
Correspondence received dated 19/02/2026 from the Minster for Health, Jennifer Carroll 
McNeill TD in relation to home help waiting lists. 
Members noted the correspondence from the Minster for Health, Jennifer Carroll McNeill TD 
and requested that Cork County Council write to the HSE highlighting the motion forwarded 
to them by the Minister for Health and emphasizing the urgency of the matter. 
          9/3-1 
CARRIGTWOHILL CAMPUS 
Correspondence received dated 20/02/2026 from the Minister for Education and Youth 
Hildegarde Naughton TD in relation to the playing field retention site at Carrigtwohill 
Campus.  
Members noted the correspondence from the Minister for Education and Youth Hildegarde 
Naughton TD 

Min.March1.2026 
 
[h] 
NOTICES OF MOTION 
FOGRAÍ RÚN 
 
POTHOLES  
 
  10/3-1 
Cllr Cathal Rasmussen proposed, seconded by Cllr Ger Curley 
 
“That a report be given on the cost to Cork County Council on cases taken by motorists due 
to damage to their cars after hitting potholes over the last 5 years broken down by each year. 
Can this be broken down by each municipal area also?” 
 
Response:  
 
Table 1 below outlines the status, number and value of pothole claims for the years 2021 – 
2025.  A breakdown by Municipal District is not available. There is a robust and rigorous 
investigation into each claim.  
It should be noted that these claims are not paid out directly by Cork County Council, but by 
our insurers Irish Public Bodies, as they are covered under our Public Liability insurance 
policy. 
 
Table 1 - Cork County Council Pothole Insurance Claims 2021 - 2025 
Years (Claim Registration Date) Claim Status No. of Claims Net Claim Value 
2021 Total 
  
242 
€44,363 
  
  
  
  
2022 Total 
  
205 
€40,843 
  
  
  
  
2023 Total 
  
515 
€121,356 
  
  
  
  
2024 Total 
  
360 
€103,458 
  
  
  
  
2025 Total 
  
345 
€63,304 
  
 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Assistant Chief Executive (North) Niall Healy 
• Members stated that the figures appeared smaller than expected based on what they 
would have heard on the ground and they asked for further details in relation to the 
claims criteria and figure increases in 2023 and 2024.  

Min.March1.2026 
• Members said that tremendous work was being done in regard to road drainage however 
they would like to see more patchers if possible.   
 
Assistant Chief Executive (North) Niall Healy stated that the figures presented represented the 
number of claims settled not the number of claims received. He highlighted that all claims go 
through a robust investigation and are dealt with through Irish Public Bodies Insurance. Mr 
Healy stated that the increase in figures noted by the Councillors in 2023 and 2024 was due to 
severe weather events and he commended the work of Cork County Councils 23 Velocity 
Patchers that are deployed across the County.  
 
BORD BIA 
 
 11/3-1 
Cllr proposed Cllr Peter O’Donoghue, seconded by Cllr Danny Collins 
 
That Cork County Council calls for the Minister for Agriculture, to suspend Larry Murrin, with 
immediate effect, from his position as chairman of Bord Bia.” 
 
At the agreement of Cllr Danny Collins, the members agreed that his motion below, Agenda 
Item 18, would be discussed in tandem with Motion 11.  
 
We in Independent Ireland are calling on the Minister of Agriculture Martin Heydon to make 
Larry Murrin to stand aside from his post as chairman of Bord Bia until the I.F.A’s proposed 
full inquiry has taken place.” 
 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed members of the IFA and members of the farming community to 
the chamber.  
• Members stated that the independent governance review is a welcomed step in the 
process.  
• Members said that we must protect our food security and our high quality food 
standards and ensure people are not losing faith in our farming institutions.  
• Members said that this should not distract us from the upcoming review of the CAP as 
this is where our attention needs to go.  
• Cllr Gearoid Murphy proposed an amendment that he felt would address the issues 
raised in the two notice of motions and which he felt would take account of recent 
events with regards to Larry Murrin.  
• Cllr Peter O’Donoghue objected to the below amendment put forward by Cllr Gearóid 
Murphy as the wording was a departure from the wording in his motion and he 
requested his motion be voted on. The Deputy Mayor advised that the matter is being 
dealt with in accordance with standing orders by way of an amendment. 

Min.March1.2026 
• Amendment 1: 
 
“That Cork County Council supports the current independent governance review of Bord Bia, 
and that the Chair is stepping aside from meetings pending the outcome” 
 
Proposed by Cllr Gearóid Murphy  
Seconded by Cllr Anthony Barry 
A vote was taken on the amended resolution, which resulted as follows: 
 
FOR: 
  
Councillors: Bambury, Coleman, Coughlan G, Foley, O’Sullivan M, Cronin, Harrington, Gill, Buckley 
A, Dalton-O’Sullivan, Donovan, Fahy, McCarthy U, White, Barry, Finn, O’ Callaghan, Rasmussen, 
Dawson, O’Flynn, Browne, Doyle, Murphy T, Looney, Lucey, Lynch, Madden, Murphy G, O’Shea T, 
Sheehan, Ahern, Cocking, Mulcahy, Carroll, Kelly, McCarthy B, Towse 
 
 
[37] 
AGAINST:  Collins J, Collins D, Curley, Cotter, O’Donoghue, O’Leary, Coughlan M, Buckley J, 
Horgan, Sexton, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[10] 
The Deputy Mayor declared the amended resolution as carried and that there would be no further vote 
on the matter. Mr O’Donoghue expressed his dissatisfaction and requested a vote to be taken on his 
original motion. The Deputy Mayor stated that the matter had been dealt with and there would be no 
further vote.  
 
 
MAINTENANCE FUNDING 
 
 12/2-1 
Cllr Úna McCarthy proposed, seconded by Cllr Kay Dawson 
 
That this Council write to the Minister for Transport, Darragh O' Brien, requesting that the 
National Transport Authority (NTA), in conjunction with Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
(TII), establish a dedicated, ring-fenced fund for the ongoing maintenance of greenways and 
active travel infrastructure, including cycling and pedestrian facilities, with funding allocated 
to local authorities on a sustainable, multi-annual basis. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members agreed that a dedicated maintenance fund provided on a multi-annual basis is 
required to ensure we safeguard the high-quality infrastructure of our cycling and 
pedestrian facilities. 

Min.March1.2026 
• Members stated that without proper investment from Central Government too much 
strain will be placed on the Area Office budgets.  
• Members suggested if the maintenance cost and management should come sit with a 
National Body rather than Local Government.  
 
Assistant Chief Executive (North) Niall Healy said that he understood that there was a 
commitment from Central Government to look into a maintenance fund and he would keep the 
members updated should further information come to light. He said that Cork County Council 
would keep an open mind on the best model through which to facilitate ongoing maintenance 
however that at this point the provision of funding is central.  
 
Members agreed to write to the Minister for Transport, Darragh O' Brien, requesting that the 
National Transport Authority (NTA), in conjunction with Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
(TII), establish a dedicated, ring-fenced fund for the ongoing maintenance of greenways and 
active travel infrastructure, including cycling and pedestrian facilities, with funding allocated 
to local authorities on a sustainable, multi-annual basis.” 
 
WARMER HOMES SCHEME 
13/2-1 
“To write to the Minister for Climate, Energy and the Environment and the Minister for State 
for Older People to ask what measures, if any, are being put in place to expedite Warmer 
Homes Scheme applications which are currently taking over two years to complete.” 
At the agreement of the Members, it was decided that this motion would be deferred to the 
next meeting of Full Council on 23/03/2026. 
 
SENIOR ALERT SCHEME  
14/2-1 
Proposed by Cllr Dominic Finn, seconded by Cllr Gearoid Murphy 
 
That Cork County Council writes to Minister Dara Calleary at the Department of Rural and 
Community Development and the Gaeltacht and ask that exceptions be made to people under 
the age of 65 years who are medically vulnerable and living alone and allow them to avail of 
the Senior Alert Scheme. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following point: 
 
• Members agreed that providing access to the Senior Alert Scheme for the medically 
vulnerable would, reduce anxiety for the users, prevent complications from delayed 
medical assistance and improve peace of mind for family and careers.  
• Members stated that the action will not provoke high costs but would see a high 
impact on the ground. 

Min.March1.2026 
• Members said that a case by case approach in regard to the schemes criteria would be 
essential.  
 
Members agreed to write to Minister Dara Calleary at the Department of Rural and 
Community Development and the Gaeltacht and ask that exceptions be made to people under 
the age of 65 years who are medically vulnerable and living alone and allow them to avail of 
the Senior Alert Scheme. 
TELEPHONE SERVICE REPAIR  
15/3-1 
That this Council would write to the Minister for Communications Patrick O Donovan TD, to 
Eir, and to the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg) to express serious 
concern regarding the prolonged delays experienced by residents in having telephone services 
repaired when faults occur. 
During this discussion, the members made the following point: 
 
• Members stated that for members of the public living across rural areas or islands the 
land line is a necessity not a luxury. A lack of landline can lead to social isolation, 
limit access to medical services or affect the general sense of safety/wellbeing of the 
older community.  
• Members said that the elderly are the most at risk and legislation should exist to 
impose penalties on Eir when prolonged reconnection delays effect its most 
vulnerable customers.   
  
Members agreed to write to the Minister for Communications Patrick O Donovan TD, to Eir, 
and to the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg) to express serious concern 
regarding the prolonged delays experienced by residents in having telephone services 
repaired when faults occur.” 
 
COASTLINE EROSION 
16/3-1 
Proposed by Cllr Patrick Mulcahy, seconded by Cllr Audrey Buckley 
 
That Cork County Council would examine the creation of a policy of installing Groynes (both 
vertically and horizontally) on our beaches across the Cork Coastline as a low-cost safety 
measure to reduce Wave Energy to slow down the erosion of land banks and to protect 
properties for many years to come. Funding to be applied through the OPW's Minor Works 
application. 
Response: 
 
Cork County coastline has a length of 1,118km of which 422km is soft coastline made up of 
beaches, mudflats and soil cliffs. The OPW funded Youghal Coastal Erosion Management 

Min.March1.2026 
Study covers approximately 10km from Youghal Front Strand, Youghal Claycastle, Redbarn, 
Pilmore Cottages, and Ring; while the UCC Cork Coastline Vulnerability Assessment Study 
2022-2026 includes monitoring at Owenahincha, Inchydoney, Garresttstown, Garylucas and 
Pilmore. 
  
Cork County Council is currently monitoring at the Warren and Long Strand. 
  
Groynes were historically constructed in Youghal Bay and where expert advice is such that the 
installation of groynes is an appropriate solution, and the project meets the Cost Benefit 
Analysis criteria for OPW Minor Works, Cork County Council will pursue the installation of 
groynes, subject to availability of match funding. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following point: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Assistant Chief Executive (South), Sharon 
Corcoran.  
• Members stated that we need more protection on our coastlines to slow down the 
energy of our waves. 
• Members said that we need a clear policy around coastal erosion so that Cork County 
Council can be proactive rather than reactive if funding is secured through channels 
such as the OPW’s Minor Works scheme.  
• Members asked would Cork County Council also consider Nature Based Solutions 
such as Marram Grass and look at the range of options available to them to ensure a 
balanced approach.  
 
Substitute Chief Executive Michael Lynch said that he had noted the comments on Nature 
Based Solutions. The matter would be referred to the Coastal SPC for consideration and the 
SPC would report back to Councillors with any updates.  
 
LPT WAIVER SCHEME 
17/3-1 
Proposed by Cllr Ger Curley, seconded by Cllr Cathal Rasmussen 
 
That we write to the Minister for Finance Simon Harris that a waiver scheme be put in place 
for any households for payment of LPT where a housing estate has not been taken in charge 
when estates have been completed for more than five years.” 
During this discussion, the members made the following point: 
 
• Members stated that this problem is not unique to Cork County Council and more state 
funding needs to be provided to allow Councils to take estates in charge. 
• Members said that years of no investment in estates around the country are leading to 
problems in lighting, potholes, drainage and water facilities.  

Min.March1.2026 
• It is now acting as a disadvantage as some banks are refusing mortgages if estates are 
not taken in charge. 
 
Substitute Chief Executive Michael Lynch acknowledged that it was an ongoing issue across 
County Councils and extra funding is needed. He said that 35 estates were taken in charge in 
2025 and we are in advanced discussions in 32 other locations with developers for 2026. Mr 
Lynch said that further updates on advances on these figures will be brought to development 
group in due course.  
 
Members agreed to write to the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance Simon Harris and seek extra 
funding to take estates in charge as the council have insufficient funding. 
 
 
BORD BIA 
18/3-1 
We in Independent Ireland are calling on the Minister of Agriculture Martin Heydon to make 
Larry Murrin to stand aside from his post as chairman of Bord Bia until the I.F.A’s proposed 
full inquiry has taken place.” 
At the agreement of Cllr Danny Collins, it was decided that this motion would be discussed in 
conjunction with Motion 11 as above.  
 
Extension of Time 
As the time was now 14.00 an extension of time and recess was agreed. 
Proposed: Councillor Finbarr Harrington 
Seconded: Councillor Audrey Buckley  
 
[k] 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS 
RÚN CHOMHGHAIRDIS 
 19/3-1 
 
TO:  Norma Prendergast on celebrating her 90th birthday 
 
TO:  Tommy Deane member of the Irish U18 Pool Team on winning the European U18 
Pool Championships in Cyprus.  
 
TO: 
Carrigtwohill Community College on Winning the Munster Girls Soccer College 
league. 
 
TO: 
Aoife O’Sullivan on winning the Indoor Women's High Jump Senior Championship 
 
TO: 
St. Peters Community School on winning the FAI under 15s Schools Munster Final 
 
TO: 
Colaiste Mhuire on wining the U16 Basketball All Ireland Championship 
 

Min.March1.2026 
TO: 
Cork County Council Library staff on their promotion across Women's Day 
 
TO: 
Schull Community College on winning the team racing school of the year 
 
 
[l] 
ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
 
AON GHNÓ EILE 
 
 
~   THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING   ~ 
