  
 
Minutes of Proceedings at Meeting of Cork County Council held in the Council Chamber, Floor 
2, County Hall and by Microsoft Teams on Monday 25th May 2026 
 
I LATHAIR 
         Comhairleoir Máire Léineacháin Ui Foghlú, Méara Chontae. 
Comhairleoiri: Uí Bhambaire, Ó Colmáin, Ó Coileáin S, Ó Foghlú, Uí Shúilleabháin M, Ó Coileáin 
D, Ní Chróinín, Ó hArrachtáin, Mac Giolla, Uí Bhuachalla A, Daltún, Ó Suilleabháin, Donnabháin, Ó 
Fathaigh, Ní Charthaigh Ú, De Faoite, Barra, Mac Iorlla, Ó Finn, Ní Cheallacháin, Rasmussen, 
Sheppard, Mac Coitir, Dawson, Uí Bhriain, Ó Donnchú, Ó Floinn, Ó Laoghaire, De Brún, Ó 
Dubhghaill, Ó Muineacháin B, Ní Murchú T, Ó Cochláin M, Ó Luanaigh, Ó Luasa, Ui Loinsigh, Ní 
Mhuineacháin G, Ó Haodha, Ó Madaoin, Ó Múrchú G, Ó Sé T, Ó Síocháin, Ní Heachthigheirn, Ó 
Buachalla S, Cocking, Ó Héigheartaigh, Ó Hargáín, Léineacháin Ui Foghlú, Ó Maolchathaigh, Ní 
Cheallaigh, NÍ Charthaigh, Ó Seasnáin, Towse 
Leithscéalta: Uí Chochláin G 
 
PRESENT  
 
 
               Councillor Mary Linehan Foley, County Mayor, presided. 
Councillor: Bambury, Coleman, Collins J, Foley, O’Sullivan M, Collins D, Cronin, Harrington, Gill, 
Buckley A, Dalton-O’Sullivan, Donovan, Fahy, McCarthy U, White, Barry, Curley, Finn, O’ Callaghan, 
Rasmussen, Sheppard, Cotter, Dawson, O’Brien, O’Donoghue, O’Flynn, O’Leary, Browne, Doyle, 
Moynihan B, Murphy T, Coughlan M, Looney, Lucey, Lynch, Moynihan G, Hayes, Madden, Murphy 
G, O’Shea T, Sheehan, Ahern, Buckley J, Cocking, Hegarty, Horgan, Linehan Foley, Mulcahy, Kelly, 
McCarthy B, Sexton, Towse 
Apologies: Coughlan G 
Chief Executive, Assistant Chief Executives, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Services, Assistant 
Staff Officer, Corporate Services.  
 
[a] 
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES 
 
DEIMHNIÚ MIONTUAIRISCÍ 
1/5-2 
Proposed by Councillor Cllr. Ann Marie Ahern  
            Seconded by Councillor Cllr. Michael Hegarty 
 
RESOLVED:  
That the minutes of the Meeting held on May 11th, 2026, confirmed and signed by the Mayor. 
 
[b] VOTES OF SYMPATHY 

      RÚN CHOMHBHRÓIN 
2/5-2 
TO: Cllr Ann Marie Ahern on the passing of her aunt Joan Noonan  
TO: Shiela Carroll on the passing of her bother in law Johnny Carroll 
TO: Cllr Michael Hegarty on the passing of his Cousin Cathy Dunne 
TO: The Sheehan family on the passing of James Sheehan  
TO: Fergus and Margaret McCarthy on the passing of their sibling Michael McCarthy 
TO: John Quirke on the passing of his father John Quirke 
[c] 
STATUTORY BUSINESS 
 
GNÓ REACHTÚIL 
 
3/5-2 
SPECIAL MEETING  
 
Approval for Special Meeting of Full Council to be held on May 29th at 11am on the Proposed Variation 
of the Cork County Development Plan 2022 – 2028. 
 
Proposed by Councillor Cllr. Michael Hegarty 
            Seconded by Councillor Cllr. Daniel Sexton 
 
 
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 
SECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001: 
         4/5-2 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF BANDON - KINSALE 
 
Grant of Right of Way, Cappagh, Kinsale, Co. Cork. 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, the disposal of 
the property as shown hereunder shall be carried out in accordance with the terms specified in the notice 
issued to members dated May 15th, 2026. 
 
Situation:  
Grant of Right of Way, Cappagh, Kinsale, Co. Cork. 
Area: 
Measuring c.959m2 coloured yellow on the attached map. 
From whom acquired: 
In CCC ownership since 2011. 
To whom it is proposed 
to Grant: 
Castdale Limited. 
 
Consideration: 
€1.00. 

PART 8 MANAGER’S REPORT SECTIONS 179(3) OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT 
ACT 2000 (AS AMENDED)   
 
 
 
          
           5/5-2 
RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 179 OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT ACT 2000 AS 
AMENDED. 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF EAST CORK:  
Consideration of Part 8 Chief Executive’s Report for development of Facility Centre for Water Sports 
Activities, Claycastle, Youghal, Co. Cork 
 
Proposed Development: 
 
The proposed building has a gross floor area of approximately 58 sq.m and is located entirely within 
the existing car park footprint. The building is a single low-rise structure comprising: 
 
-      5 no. indoor showers; 
-      4 no. outdoor showers and wash-down facilities; 
-      4 no. toilet cubicles (including a Changing Places accessible facility);  
- 
Wash-hand basins; 
-      Ancillary storage and equipment space;  
-      Induction / briefing area. 
 
Key design and engineering features of the proposed development include: 
 
- 
Compact building footprint entirely within existing hardstanding — no works to beach, 
dunes or inter-tidal zone; 
- 
Minor reconfiguration and reduction of approximately 25 no. marked parking spaces 
within the overall car park (reduced capacity approximately 225 spaces); 
- 
Separate foul and surface water drainage systems, each connecting to existing Uisce 
Éireann public sewer infrastructure via sealed connections; 
- 
No demolition works and no excavation beyond that required for foundation construction; 
- 
Reinforced concrete piled foundations designed in accordance with the Eurocodes and 
Exposure class xsl (IS EN
 
- 
Proposed finished floor level of 4.60m OD Malin — elevated above modelled tidal flood 
levels for Flood Zones A and B; 
- 
Flood-compatible open external envelope, non-return valves on drainage, flood-resilient 
finishes and elevated electrical services; 
- 
Low-spill, downward-directed external lighting controlled by timers and/or motion 
sensors;  
- 
Ecological awareness signage (Respect and Protect; Check—Clean—Dry biosecurity 
guidance). 
 
Proposed by Councillor Cllr. Mary Linehan Foley 
            Seconded by Councillor Cllr. Michael Hegarty 
 
 
[e] 
REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEES 

 
TUAIRISCÍ AGUS MOLTAÍ Ó CHOISTÍ 
 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF EAST CORK  
                        6/5-2 
Cllr Mary Linehan Foley proposed, seconded by Cllr Ann Marie Ahern 
 
Asking ECMD and Cork County Council to liaise with Minister Micheal Moynihan to liaise with 
Bridging the Gap Youghal to facilitate a Secondary school for all in Youghal.  
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• 
Members agreed that the voluntary group “Bridging the Gap” need to be commended for 
advocating for their children and for children to follow.  
• 
Members stated that school students with special needs in Youghal must drive to Dungarvan, 
Cork City or Carrigtwohill to avail of a Secondary level education. It was agreed that school 
places within a reasonable distance to their homes should be the right of every child.  
• 
Members highlighted that there is currently no plan in place or specialised units being created 
to remedy this issue.  
• 
On the approval of Cllr Mary Linehan Foley it was agreed to include the HSE and Minister for 
Education and Youth Hildegarde Naughton would also be included in correspondence to 
expedite engagement between stakeholders.  
 
Members agreed to write to the  Minister of state Micheal Moynihan, Minister for Education and Youth 
Hildegarde Naughton and the HSE to liaise with Bridging the Gap Youghal to facilitate a Secondary 
school for all in Youghal. 
 
 
[g] 
CORRESPONDENCE FROM GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS 
  
COMHFHREAGRAS Ó RANNA RIALTAS 
 
SNAS  
           7/5-2 
Correspondence received dated 12/05/2026 from Department of Education and Youth in  
relation to SNAs.      
   
Members noted the response received. 
 
RURAL PLANNING 
           8/5-2 
Correspondence received dated 27/04/2026 from Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage in relation to Rural Planning. 
 
Members noted the response received. 
 
DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTIONS WAIVER SCHEME 
         9/5-2 
 
Correspondence received dated 30/04/2026 from Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage in relation to the Development Contributions Waiver Scheme. 
 
Members noted the response received. 
 

LOCAL LINK SERVICES 
                                      
10/5-2 
 
Correspondence received dated 24/04/2026 Department of Transport in relation to the Local Link 
Services 
 
Members noted the response received and agreed to write to the NTA with a request for a reply on 
the same motion.  
 
N20 
         11/5-2 
Correspondence received dated 06/05/2026 from Transport Infrastructure Ireland in relation to  
the N20. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
• 
Members stated that a meeting was needed with TII as a matter of urgency and requested would 
it be possible to arrange meetings on a divisional bases.  
• 
Members agreed that the volume of traffic on the N20 and the fact that it is our National Route 
between Cork and Limerick deems it a high priority for repairs.  
 
Michael Lynch, Assistant Chief Executive (South) acknowledged members concerns and assured them 
that the Executive is being extremely proactive in engaging with TII and all are focused on addressing 
the issues. Niall Healy Assistant Chief Executive (North) added that Cork County Council met with TII 
6 weeks ago and they will be aiming to meet them again with a membership from each MD in late 
June/July. 
 
 
[h] 
NOTICES OF MOTION 
 
FOGRAÍ RÚN 
 
AMHRAN NA BHFIANN 
 
  12/5-2 
Cllr Peter O’Donoghue proposed, seconded by Cllr Ben Dalton O’Sullivan 
 
“That Cork County Council, having regard to this year 2026 being the 100 year anniversary of the 
official adaptation of Amhran na bhFiann as the national anthem of Ireland, write to the Minister for 
Education and request that the teaching and singing of Amhran Na bhFiann be made a compulsory 
element of the weekly school curriculum in both primary and Secondary schools throughout the state.” 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• 
Members agreed that the motion was a good idea in regards to its sentiment as it would foster 
civic pride however it was not believed that its introduction as a compulsory weekly activity 
would be appropriate.  
• 
Members stated that this topic had been recently addressed in the Dail and the Minister has 
given an answer indicating that Amhran na bhFiann is on the curriculum and each school 
decides on how it is applied through the Board of Management.  
• 
On the approval of Cllr Peter O’Donoghue it was agreed to add the Minister for Culture, and 
the National Television Service to the motion and related correspondence.  
 

Members agreed that having regard to this year 2026 being the 100 year anniversary of the official 
adaptation of Amhran na bhFiann as the national anthem of Ireland, they would write to the Minister 
for Education, Minister for Culture, and the National Television Service and request that the teaching 
and singing of Amhran Na bhFiann be made a compulsory element of the weekly school curriculum in 
both primary and Secondary schools throughout the state.”   
 
ACCESS AND INCLUSION OFFICER 
 
  13/5-2 
Cllr Danny Collins proposed, seconded by Cllr Audrey Buckley 
 
“I am calling on Cork County Council to identify a funding source for the appointment of a dedicated, 
full-time and fully resourced Access and Inclusion Officer.” 
 
Response:  
 
Cork County Council has a process in place whereby an Access Officer is employed within the County 
Hall Complex. Any queries regarding access outside of the complex are forwarded to the relevant 
Municipal District Offices and specific directorates for their action.  
 
Cork County Council also employs a dedicated Disability Liaison Officer to support staff with 
disabilities. 
 
This role includes: 
 
• 
Providing ongoing support to employees with disabilities. 
• 
Assisting the Recruitment Team in the recruitment of candidates with disabilities. 
• 
Engaging with external organisations on matters relating to the recruitment and employment of 
people with disabilities. 
 
Cork County Councils Library & Arts Department provides a very significant accessible approach to 
the delivery of its services, through physical access, stock selection, ICT & online services, age friendly 
strategies, sensory resources. A range of staff training is provided to ensure an awareness of the diverse 
needs of library users. 
 
In addition, Cork County Council promotes inclusion & access through the L.C.D.C. 
Cork County Council is reviewing its approach to access within the overall organisation and will 
provide an update to members when concluded.  
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
• 
Members stated that only six County Councils have a dedicated Access and Inclusions Officer 
and having a position in place will help mitigate issues before they arise.  
• 
Members said that Cork County Council are generally outstanding in the area of inclusion and 
asked would the money be better spent by putting the financial resources into doing the work 
on the ground rather than through a full time position? 

• 
Members said that Cork County Council has made great strives in regards to promoting 
accessibility in the workplace and it’s public spaces. 
Assistant Chief Executive (West) Angela McAllen, said that Cork County Council provides significant 
accessibility through its Library and Arts Services in addition to inclusion and access promotion 
through the L.C.D.C. Ms McAllen assured the members that the design of all new public realm 
facilities also incorporate disability inclusion. Ms McAllen further stated that the area requires 
continuous improvement and Cork County Council is reviewing its approach incorporating all the 
points from this and previous meetings and will revert to the members.  
 
WASTEWATER AND SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 
 
  14/5-2 
Cllr Audrey Buckley proposed, seconded by Cllr Pat Hayes 
 
That Cork County Council seeks a full report from the relevant Director of Services, in conjunction 
with Uisce Éireann and Waterways Ireland, outlining the measures currently in place to regulate and 
manage wastewater and sewage discharge from people living on boats (liveaboards) in Cork’s 
harbours, rivers and coastal areas; the availability and adequacy of pump-out and waste disposal 
facilities; the level of enforcement of existing bye-laws; and any plans to introduce stricter regulation, 
monitoring or infrastructure to prevent untreated wastewater entering our waterways. 
 
Response:  
 
In response to the Councillors motion, we wish to advise members that we will consider this matter 
with the relevant authorities and revert to the relevant SPC should there be matters relating to overall 
policy.  
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
• 
Members stated that beeches are losing Blue Flag Status because of the issue which could 
affect the enjoyment of our natural amenities and cause a threat to wildlife.  
• 
Members asked if recreational boats had the proper facilities such as safe discharge areas and 
other supports available to them to dispose of waste in a regulated manner.   
• 
Members said that they did not want this issue affecting tourism and our harbours need to be 
maintained and protected.  
Michael Lynch, Assistant Chief Executive (South) acknowledged that this was an emerging issue and 
Cork County Council will research best practice and how it is managed elsewhere. Findings will be 
reported back the Coastal SPC for consideration.  
 
HOMEMAKER'S SCHEME 
 
  15/5-2 
Cllr Eamonn Horgan proposed, seconded by Cllr Ann Bambury 
 
That Cork County Council would ask the Minister of Social Protection, Dara Calleary to review the 
Homemaker's Scheme, and grant those  in the scheme who are on a reduced contributory pension, the 

full rate of contributory pension. We ask this of the Minister to recognise the contribution of mothers 
and carers to Irish society. 
 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
• 
Members agreed that the Homemakers Scheme fails to recognise the sacrifices made by parents 
and carers to look after children and vulnerable family members.  
• 
Members stated that parents and carers contribution to the community needs to be recognised 
and protected and they should be treated with dignity later in life. 
• 
Members said that due to systematic failures for some parents it is not economically viable to 
return to work. Parents should be fully supported and incentivised to return to work. 
 
Members agreed to write the Minister of Social Protection, Dara Calleary to review the Homemaker's 
Scheme, and grant those in the scheme who are on a reduced contributory pension, the full rate of 
contributory pension. We ask this of the Minister to recognise the contribution of mothers and carers to 
Irish society.  
 
GARDA VETTING SYSTEM 
 
  16/5-2 
Cllr Dominic Finn proposed, seconded by Cllr Ann Marie Ahern 
 
“That Cork County Council writes to the Minister for Justice, Jim O'Callaghan, requesting that 
consideration be given to introducing a more efficient and streamlined Garda Vetting System for 
volunteers and employees involved with multiple organisations. 
  
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
• 
Members discussed the importance of Garda Vetting and protection for our children and 
vulnerable needs to remain at the centre of any new system.  
• 
Members agreed that the current process is frustrating and a reform is needed for a 
modernised, simplified and centralised system that does not act as a barrier to voluntary 
organisations and their volunteers.  
• 
Members acknowledge that central government is reviewing the system and although it is 
considered in line with international best practice a review group of key stakeholders is in 
process.  
Members agreed to write to the Minister for Justice, Jim O'Callaghan, requesting that 
consideration be given to introducing a more efficient and streamlined Garda Vetting System for 
volunteers and employees involved with multiple organisations.  
 
[k] 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS 
 
RÚN CHOMHGHAIRDIS 
         17/5-2 
TO: Daniel Ennis on his recent election to Dublin Central 
 
TO: Fine Gael's Seán Kyne on his recent election to Galway West  
 
TO: Cork Camogie U23 Team & Manager on winning the Under 23 All Ireland 

 
TO: Aisling Fitzgerald on winning the National Scratch Championship 
 
TO: Claire Crowley on winning the All Ireland 60kg U19 Boxing Championship 
 
TO: Crosshaven Street Feast team on running a successful event 
 
 
[l] 
ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
 
AON GHNÓ EILE 
  
 
~   THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING   ~ 
