 
Minutes of Proceedings at Meeting of Cork County Council held in the Council Chamber, County 
Hall, Cork and by Microsoft Teams on Monday 13th April 2026 
 
I LATHAIR 
         Comhairleoir Máire Léineacháin Ui Foghlú, Méara Chontae. 
Comhairleoiri: Uí Bhambaire, Ó Colmáin, Ó Coileáin S, Uí Chochláin G, Ó Foghlú, Uí 
Shúilleabháin M, Ó Coileáin D, Ní Chróinín, Ó hArrachtáin, Mac Giolla, Uí Bhuachalla A, 
Daltún, Ó Suilleabháin, Donnabháin, Ó Fathaigh, Ní Charthaigh Ú, De Faoite, Barra, Mac 
Iorlla, Ó Finn, Ní Cheallacháin, Rasmussen, Sheppard, Mac Coitir, Uí Bhriain, Ó Donnchú, Ó 
Floinn, Ó Laoghaire, De Brún, Ó Dubhghaill, Ó Muineacháin B, Ní Murchú T, Ó Cochláin M, 
Ó Luanaigh, Ó Luasa, Ui Loinsigh, Ní Mhuineacháin G, Ó Haodha, Ó Madaoin, Ó Múrchú G, 
Ó Sé T, Ó Síocháin, Ní Heachthigheirn, Ó Buachalla S, Cocking, Ó Héigheartaigh, Ó Hargáín, 
Léineacháin Ui Foghlú, Ó Maolchathaigh, Ó Cearbhaill, Ní Cheallaigh, NÍ Charthaigh, Ó 
Seasnáin, Towse 
Leithscéalta: Dawson 
 
PRESENT  
 
 
               Councillor Mary Linehan Foley, County Mayor, presided. 
Councillor: Bambury, Coleman, Collins J, Coughlan G, Foley, O’Sullivan M, Collins D, 
Cronin, Harrington, Gill, Buckley A, Dalton-O’Sullivan, Donovan, Fahy, McCarthy U, White, 
Barry, Curley, Finn, O’ Callaghan, Rasmussen, Sheppard, Cotter, O’Brien, O’Donoghue, 
O’Flynn, O’Leary, Browne, Doyle, Moynihan B, Murphy T, Coughlan M, Looney, Lucey, 
Lynch, Moynihan G, Hayes, Madden, Murphy G, O’Shea T, Sheehan, Ahern, Buckley J, 
Cocking, Hegarty, Horgan, Linehan Foley, Mulcahy, Carroll, Kelly, McCarthy B, Sexton, 
Towse  
Apologies: Dawson 
Chief Executive, Assistant Chief Executives, Director of Service, Corporate Services, Senior Executive 
Officer, Corporate Services. 
 
[a] 
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES 
 
DEIMHNIÚ MIONTUAIRISCÍ 
1/1-4 
Proposed by Councillor Cllr. Michael Hegarty  
            Seconded by Councillor Cllr. Finbarr Harrington 
 
RESOLVED:  

That the minutes of the Meeting held on March 23rd, 2026, confirmed and signed by the 
Mayor. 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
To discuss the current National fuel crisis 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Alan Coleman 
Seconded by Cllr. Finbarr Harrington 
 
[b] 
VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
2/1-4 
TO: Caroline Crowley on the passing of her husband and former member of Cork County 
Council Con Crowley.  
TO:  Mrs Alice Coniry on the passing of her husband Michael Coniry. 
TO:  Ivan and Krystle Meaney on the passing of their father Kevin Meaney. 
TO:  Sheila Barrett on the passing of her husband Sean Barrett.  
[c] 
STATUTORY BUSINESS 
 
GNÓ REACHTÚIL 
 
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 
SECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001: 
           3/1-4 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF WEST CORK 
Boundary Rectification at Bantry Enterprise Park (A) 
       3(a)/1-4 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, the disposal of 
the property as shown hereunder shall be carried out in accordance with the terms specified in the notice 
issued to members dated April 2nd, 2026. 
Situation:                    
Bantry Enterprise Park, Seafield, Bantry, Co. Cork 
Area: 
0.0254 hectares plus ROW in favour of Michael 
Harrington 
From Whom Acquired:   
 
Unknown – predated Council records 
To whom it is proposed to Dispose:  Bantry Glass & Glazing Limited   
Consideration:  
Nil - part of boundary rectification to regularize matters 
in the Land Registry  

MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF WEST CORK 
Boundary Rectification at Bantry Enterprise Park (B) 
3(b)/1-4 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, the disposal of 
the property as shown hereunder shall be carried out in accordance with the terms specified in the notice 
issued to members dated April 2nd, 2026. 
 
Situation:  
Bantry Enterprise Park, Seafield, Bantry, Co. Cork 
 
Area:  
0.0549 hectares   
 
From whom acquired:  
Unknown – predated Council records 
 
Consideration:  
Nil - part of boundary rectification to regularize matters 
in the Land Registry 
 
 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF FERMOY 
Wayleave to Electricity Supply Board, Coolnanave, Mitchelstown, Co. Cork 
       3(c)/1-4 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, the disposal of 
the property as shown hereunder shall be carried out in accordance with the terms specified in the notice 
issued to members dated April 2nd, 2026. 
 
Situation:   
Wayleave to Electricity Supply Board, Coolnanave, 
Mitchelstown, Co. Cork 
Area:   
 
 
Cable Easement marked in blue on the attached map 
From whom acquired:  
In Cork County Council ownership since 1955. 
To whom it is proposed  
to Dispose:  
 
 
Electricity Supply Board. 
 
Consideration:  
 
€1.00 
PART 8 MANAGER’S REPORT SECTIONS 179(3) OF THE PLANNING & 
DEVELOPMENT ACT 2000 (AS AMENDED)   
 
 
 
           4/1-4 
RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 179 OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT ACT 
2000 AS AMENDED. 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF EAST CORK:  

                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        4(a)/1-4 
Consideration of Part 8 Chief Executive’s report in respect of: 
 
 
Members resolved to approve Part 8 Chief Executive’s Report. 
Proposed by Cllr. Rory Cocking 
Seconded by Cllr. Eamonn Horgan 
 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF BANDON – KINSALE 
                       
4(b)/1-4 
Consideration of Part 8 Chief Executive’s report in respect of: 
 
The construction of a new housing development at Island Field, Abbey-lands, Kinsale, Co. 
Cork, consisting of: 
• 
29 no.1-bed apartments 
• 
15 no. 2-bed apartments 
• 
5 no. 2-bed houses 
• 
9 no. 3-bed houses 
• 
A new entrance onto the R605 and a new entrance onto the R607 Regional 
roads, internal roads and shared spaces. 
• 
A total of 78 car parking spaces including designated accessible spaces. 
• 
New pedestrian route through the site consisting of shared footpaths & cycle 
paths. 
• 
New public pedestrian infrastructure including new footpaths along the R605 
and R607 and two raised uncontrolled zebra crossings along the R605. 
• 
Landscaped public open amenity spaces including public recreation space, 
wildflower meadows, planting and trees. 
• 
New public lighting and connection to public utilities including the construction 
of an ESB substation. 
• 
All associated site and ancillary works, including, landscaping, bike and bin 
stores and drainage. 
Members resolved to approve Part 8 Chief Executive’s Report. 
The construction of a new housing development at Porters Lane, Youghal consisting of: 
 
• 
6 no. one bed apartments 
• 
Hard and soft landscaping including new planting and the resurfacing of the adjacent 
laneway 
• 
New public lighting and connection to public utilities 
• 
All associated site and ancillary works 

Proposed by Cllr. Marie O’Sullivan 
Seconded by Cllr. Ann Bambury 
 
[e] 
REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEES 
 
TUAIRISCÍ AGUS MOLTAÍ Ó CHOISTÍ 
 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP 
                     5/1-4 
Approval of attendance by Members at Conferences/Training on the Conference list for April.  
Proposed by Cllr. Gearoid Murphy  
Seconded by Cllr. Michael Hegarty 
 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF EAST CORK  
         6/1-4 
 
“That Cork County Council writes to Minister for Transport Darragh O Brien, requesting that 
reviews of the Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (CMATS), The Regional Spatial 
and Economic Strategy (RSES) -Southern Region (which is currently in the review cycle), 
All Ireland Strategic Rail Review and the County Development Plan to allow for the 
inclusion of the possibility of the reinstatement of the Midleton – Youghal Railway Line and 
seek meetings with the main stakeholders to expedite talks on this matter.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Ann Marie-Ahern 
Seconded by Cllr. Michael Hegarty 
 
During this discussion, the Members made the following points: 
• Members stated that Cork County Council needed to look at all alternative means of 
transport to and from Youghal especially as housing development in the area is 
ongoing and traffic is increasing.   
• Members agreed that reinstating the railway line would be the best possible outcome 
however it was suggested that a Rapid Bus Corridor would be welcomed as a second 
option 
• Members said that a Railway line would both further the economic development East 
Cork and reduce carbon emissions. 
• Members suggested that this issue needs to be listed in any revised/new County 
Development Plans going forward.  
 
Members agreed to Minister for Transport Darragh O Brien, requesting that reviews of the 
Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (CMATS), The Regional Spatial and Economic 
Strategy (RSES) -Southern Region (which is currently in the review cycle), All Ireland 
Strategic Rail Review and the County Development Plan to allow for the inclusion of the 

possibility of the reinstatement of the Midleton – Youghal Railway Line or a Rapid Bus 
Corridor as a second option and seek meetings with the main stakeholders to expedite talks 
on this matter.  
 
[g] 
CORRESPONDENCE FROM GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS 
  
COMHFHREAGRAS Ó RANNA RIALTAS 
 
BREAST CHECK SCREENING PROGRAMME  
           7/1-4 
Correspondence received dated 19/03/2026 from Minister for Health Jennifer Carroll 
MacNeill, TD in relation to the Breast Check Screening Programme.  
 
             [Cllr. Ann Marie Ahern] 
Members noted the response received. 
 
 
ADULT ADHD ASSESSMENT 
           8/1-4 
Correspondence received dated 19/03/2026 from Minister for Mental Health, Mary Butler T.D. 
and the HSE in relation to Adult ADHD assessment. 
 
          [Cllr. Isobel Towse] 
Members noted the response received. 
 
 
ULVA BLOOMS 
           9/1-4 
 
Correspondence received dated 24/03/2026 from LAPROW in relation to the occurrence of sea 
lettuce (Ulva) blooms. 
 
                [Cllr. Audrey Buckley] 
 
Cllr Audrey Buckley noted her dissatisfaction with the response. 
 
MACKEREL QUOTAS 
         10/1-4 
 
Correspondence received dated 25/03/2026 from Minister of State for the Department of 
Agriculture, Food & the Marine Timmy Dooley in relation to Mackerel Quotas. 
 
       [Cllr. Danny Collins] 
Members noted the response received. 
 
FREE PERIOD PRODUCTS 

         11/1-4 
Correspondence received dated 30/03/2026 from Minister for Health Jennifer Carroll 
MacNeill, TD in relation to period products.   
        [Cllr. Mary Linehan Foley]      
Members noted the response received. 
 
 
CONSERVATION OFFICERS AND PARK RANGERS 
         12/1-4 
Correspondence received dated 01/04/2026 from Minister of State for Nature, Heritage and 
Biodiversity, Christopher O’Sulliavan, TD in relation to conservation officers and park rangers. 
 
             [Cllr. Ann Marie Ahern]      
Members noted the response received. 
 
 
[h] 
NOTICES OF MOTION 
 
FOGRAÍ RÚN 
 
RURAL HOUSING AND PLANNING POLICY 
 
  13/4-1 
 
Cllr. Finbarr Harrington proposed, seconded by Cllr. Caroline Cronin 
 
That this Council would request to set aside a special meeting of Full Council and the planning 
officials to discuss and agree how best to respond to the imminent circular from Minister James 
Browne and his department on Rural Housing and planning policy. Cork County Council will 
need to be very clear on the interpretation and the changes required in our own County 
Development Plan to facilitate Rural communities and their housing needs. 
Response:  
 
Cork County Council Rural Housing Policy is set out in the Cork County Development Plan 
2022-2028 (CDP); and is informed by Section 28 Ministerial Guidelines. 
 
At this time Council has not been issued with Update requiring a reconsideration of current 
County Development Plan Rural Housing Policy. 
 
In the event updated Ministerial Guidelines issue, Council will inform the Elected Members  as 
appropriate as to the implications, if any, of same - including consideration by the Planning 
SPC and detailed discussion at Development Committee.  
 

Should any potential future updated Ministerial Guidelines relating to Rural Housing Policy 
necessitate changes to the County Development Plan; such changes would be anticipated to 
require a Variation to the CDP, which is a reserve function of the Elected Members and which 
would follow a prescribed process including public consultation. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Michael Lynch, Assistant Chief Executive 
(South) 
• Members stated that the planning application process can be complex and costly citing 
sightlines, proximity to National Roads and Natura 2000 sites as some of the obstacles 
applicants face.  
• Members recognised that communities depend on rural one‑off houses to sustain local 
businesses, sports teams and amenities, and noted that allowing people to live within 
their own communities is essential to preserving rural life. 
• Members said that any new rural planning guidelines need to be urgently and fully 
applied in our County Development plan and align with local implementation.  
•  Members agreed that rural one-off houses need National clarity and consistency across 
all counties and clear standardised guidelines going forward.  
• Members stated that pre planning was important and should be encouraged to help 
mitigate unnecessary costs for those looking to build.  
 
Members agreed to await circular and noted that on receipt of circular the matter would be 
discussed at a Development Committee Meeting.  
 
HOUSING AID FOR OLDER PEOPLE GRANTS 
 
  14/4-1 
 
Cllr Tony O’ Shea, Cllr Aileen Browne & Cllr Trish Murphy proposed, seconded by Cllr. 
William O Leary 
 
That Cork County Council review its policy not to approve all windows and Patio Doors in the 
Housing Aid for Older People Grants as part of the Housing Adaptation Scheme which leaves 
many elderly people with draughty and old windows remaining in their home 
Response:  
 
The Housing Aid for Older People Grant is available to people aged 66 years old, or older, to 
do essential repairs, so that they can continue to live in their own home.  The grant can be used 
to do essential repairs, including repairing or replacing doors and windows.  Cork County 
Council administers the  grant in accordance with guidance received from the Department of 
Housing, Local Government & Heritage.  The Guidance states that this grant cannot be 
provided for the replacement of all of the windows in a dwelling.  Furthermore the 

Department’s website states that ‘funding for windows and doors is limited. It is generally only 
available for replacing single-glazed units that are at the end of their life. The replacement of 
existing double-glazing is only approved in exceptional circumstances where there is a proven 
structural or safety risk’.  The grant is aimed at providing assistance to people to carry out 
essential repairs to key rooms only, i.e., those in regular use by the applicant – living room, 
bedroom, kitchen and bathroom.  Where a patio door is the only rear door to a property it may 
be approved for grant aid; similarly, additional windows may be approved where a bedroom is 
used by the applicant’s carer.  
  
Any costs for works above those provided for in the DHLGH Guidelines would be borne by 
Council, using Councils own funds. 
  
For context Cork County Council received 1,011 applications for this grant in 2025, which was 
a 10% increase in the number of applications received in 2024.   Funding under the scheme is 
limited and Cork County Council endeavours to maximise the number of elderly recipients that 
can benefit from funding for essential works to their. 
  
The matter will be referred to Councils Housing SPC for consideration and report: in the 
meantime those seeking to replace all windows and doors should consider the SEAI grant 
scheme, which provides up to €5,600 towards window and door upgrades. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Michael Lynch, Assistant Chief Executive 
(South) 
• Members stated that this grant is integral to allowing elderly members within our 
community to age with dignity and independence in their homes.  
• Members said that partial replacement of windows limits the efficiency of the home 
upgrade and the benefits of any energy saving costs.  
• Members stated that the SEA grant although useful for many was not a valid option for 
older members of the community on a fixed income. 
• Members queried if the decision to implement the partial replacement of windows was 
local or national policy.  
 
 
Assistant Chief Executive (South) Michael Lynch stated that funding provided is for essential 
repairs and energy efficiency to key rooms within the household. Cork County Council 
administers the  grant in accordance with guidance received from the Department and any 
additional works outside of these the guidelines would come at a cost to Cork County 
Council.  
Member agreed to refer the matter to the housing SPC for further discussion and inform 
members if any disparities between the department guidelines and Cork County Councils 
interpretation exist.  

 
BESSBOROUGH MEMORIAL  
 
  15/4-1 
 
Cllr Dominic Finn & Cllr Mary Linehan Foley proposed, seconded by Cllr. Gearoid Murphy 
 
That Cork County Council would write to Cork City Council requesting that consideration 
would be given as part of any proposed development on the Bessborough site to provide a 
memorial to the deceased children of Bessborough who were buried in unmarked graves. 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members stated that Bessborough was not just a development site but a place of 
immense loss and we need to acknowledge and address this painful chapter in our 
history. 
• Members agreed that a memorial would offer a place for refection, public 
acknowledgement, education and ensure future generations are aware of the sites 
significance.  
• Members commended Cllr. Dominic Finn, Cllr Mary Linehan Foley and Cllr Marie 
O’Sullivan on their courage in bringing their personal experiences to the chamber and 
were fully supportive of the motion. 
 
Members agreed to write to Cork City Council requesting that consideration would be given 
as part of any proposed development on the Bessborough site to provide a memorial to the 
deceased children of Bessborough who were buried in unmarked graves.” 
 
 
REGISTERING CAR LOG BOOK AND OWNERSHIP  
 
  16/4-1 
 
Cllr Ian Doyle proposed, seconded by Cllr. Michael Looney 
 
That Cork County Council would write to Minister for Transport Darragh O Brien TD to have 
a policy of verification and authorisation in place when registering car log book and ownership. 
Example a current driver licence or PPS No and date of birth. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members stated that restrictions for change of ownership on second hard cars are too 
loose  and identification should be needed in a form of drivers licence or passport. 
• Members suggested that this might be an appropriate matter for the Cork County Local 
Community Safety Partnership 
 

Members agreed to write to Minister for Transport Darragh O Brien TD to have a policy of 
verification and authorisation in place when registering car log book and ownership. Example 
a current driver licence or PPS No and date of birth.” 
 
 
N20 MAINTENANCE  
 
  17/4-1 
 
Cllr Liam Madden proposed, seconded by Cllr. Tony O’Shea 
 
That Cork Council in conjunction with the TII address the  deteriorating condition of the 
present  N20 from County Boundary to Ballyhea  and address the lack of maintenance and 
seriously  look at safety concerns of motorists  and Communities that live along this route and 
cross same on a daily basis. 
 
Response:  
 
Cork County Council, in conjunction with TII’s Pavement Team, are currently reviewing 
sections of the national road network, including the N20, for inclusion in current pavement 
maintenance contracts. 
 
Safety schemes on the national road network are continually being reviewed and prioritised 
based on high collision locations. These are progressed in association with TII’s Road Safety 
Team and the N20 is constantly under review in this process. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Niall Healy, Assistant Chief Executive (North) 
• Members discussed the deterioration of the N20 and expressed their concern over the 
lack of maintenance from the TII. 
• Members queried when the pedestrian crossing at Buttevant would be delivered. 
• Members requested that a delegation of representatives meet with the TII to discuss 
action.  
• Members stated that the road sees over 18,000 vehicles daily and safety measures are 
needed at junctions as well as the introduction of over and under passes.  
• Members said that immediate interventions are needed as we await the motorway.  
• Members asked how TII funding was allocated?  
 
Assistant Chief Executive (North) Niall Healy stated that technical reports have been submitted 
to TII to carry out significant resurfacing of the road. Mr Healy said that we currently have 
funding for a limited amount of  localised  interventions and repairs which we will be going to 

tender shortly. Mr Healy recognised that the road would benefit from an overpass however this 
is a longer term process.  
 
Chief Executive Mrs Moira Murrell stated that Cork County Council have submitted a business 
case of 30 Million to TII and this will make the best case that we can for our National Roads. 
The Chief Executive also stated that seeking a meeting with TII was a sensible option available 
to the members stating that it would give Councillors an opportunity to highlight the important 
concerns of the local community.  
 
Members agreed to write to the TII and request a meeting with the chair from each MD, the 
mayor and relevant in house representatives to discuss the deteriorating National Roads across 
Cork County.  
 
Extension of Time 
As the time was now 13.30 an extension of time was agreed. 
Proposed: Councillor Michael Hegarty  
Seconded: Councillor Alan Coleman  
 
SECTION 254  
 
  18/4-1 
 
Cllr. Jack White proposed, seconded by Cllr. Anthony Barry 
 
Does this council receive and grant property consents to applicants who use the Section 254 
Licence application system to apply for the construction of telecommunications masts on 
property in Council ownership? If not, will this council commit to investigating the land 
ownership / consent status where telecommunications masts have been constructed on council 
owned property, or on property where a mast is planned (either through awaited Section 254 
approvals, or by decision of An Coimisiún Pleanála).      
 
Response: 
 
License Applications under Section 254 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), relating to overground electronic communications infrastructure along with 
associated physical infrastructure, are processed by the Planning Section of Cork County 
Council. Each application is assessed by a planner in accordance with established procedures 
and, where appropriate, referred to relevant stakeholders for observations. 
 
Section 254 applications are generally on public property and, pursuant to DHLGH Circular 
requirements, are evaluated against a range of criteria, including (but not limited to) the 
provisions of Cork County Development Plan, general policy objectives applicable to the area, 
and potential visual impact. 
 

Cork County Council has regard to practical impacts on adjoining lands in its assessment 
process, including when such lands are in public ownership; any issues arising in such cases 
are captured as part of the Planner’s assessment and inform the final decision. 
 
It should be noted that Section 254 Applications are subject to appeal to An Coimisiún Pleanála. 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members welcomed the response from Assistant Chief Executive (South) Michael 
Lynch. 
• Members requested further clarification on the construction of telecommunications 
masts on public lands and questioned if masts were more suitable in industrial areas 
rather than residential.  
• Members questioned do we have a right to demand a return as landowner. 
• Members requested to have an In committee MD meeting in Carrigaline to get further 
details on Section 254s where telecommunication masts are being constructed. 
 
Assistant Chief Executive (South) Michael Lynch stated that the 254 licence is in itself a form 
of consent to use public property and does not operate within the structures of a normal 
planning process. Cork County Council have a right to a return based upon scale fees set 
nationally and as it stands the fee structure is based upon application and provided for in 
legislation.  
 
 
CHILDCARE CORE FUNDING  
 
  19/4-1 
 
To write to the Minister for Children, Disability & Equality, Norma Foley to increase funding 
for staff wages & operational overheads under the Core Funding Model for Childcare 
providers.  
At the agreement of the Members, it was agreed that this motion would be deferred to the next 
meeting of Full Council on 27/04/2025. 
 
 
[k] 
VOTES OF CONGRATULATIONS 
 
RÚN CHOMHGHAIRDIS 
         20/4-1 
 
TO: Midleton Rugby Club U16 Boys Team on winning the Munster Rugby U16 Cup Final 
against Nenagh at the Virgin Media April.  
 
TO: Sean and Rose O’Driscoll on their horse “Home by the Lee” winning first place at 
Cheltenham and Aintree in recent weeks.  

 
[l] 
ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
 
AON GHNÓ EILE 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
FUEL CRISIS 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         21/4-1 
Proposed by Cllr. Alan Coleman , seconded by Cllr. Finbarr Harrington 
 
During this discussion, the members made the following points: 
 
• Members discussed the recent fuel crisis. Some Members expressed their 
disappointment with the lack of communication with the protestors.  
• Members stated that the package promised is inefficient and our people are 
disenchanted by the governments actions. 
• Members said that for many members of rural society a car is not a luxury and 
contractors/farmers and families are struggling to achieve their daily tasks within this 
cost of living crisis.  
• Members agreed that social media platforms need to be held to account when allowing 
the far right narrative to overshadow the core messages of the protest. Stronger 
oversight on platforms must be introduced to promote unity not division.  
• Members said that we need to step away from external factors affecting our energy 
supplies and take this opportunity to re-focus on homegrown green energy sources.  
• Members stated that there are official bodies and procedures in place to speak with 
government and encouraged people to join these organisations to have their voices 
heard.  
• Members asked if Cork County Council have a protocol in place to maintain critical 
services if a similar situation exists in the future.  
 
Three motions were proposed and seconded, however, it was agreed by all Members that the 
one motion only be put forward for a vote 
 
Motion 1  
 
“That this council expresses its lack of confidence in the Governments handling of the Fuel 
Crisis.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr Alan Coleman 
Seconded by Cllr Finbarr Harrington 
 
Motion 2  
 
“That this Council write to the Tanaiste, Taoiseach and the Minster for Defence condemning 
their heavy handed response to the protesters by the Irish Government.” 
 
Proposed Cllr Peter O’Donoghue  
Seconded by Cllr John Buckley 

 
Motion 3 
 
Proposed by Cllr Danny Collins 
Seconded by Cllr Daniel Sexton 
 
That we as a Council will put forward a vote of No Confidence on our Government at the 
moment.  
 
• Amendment 1: 
 
“That this council expresses its lack of confidence in the Governments handling of the Fuel 
Protests.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr Alan Coleman  
Seconded by Cllr Finbarr Harrington 
 
The Mayor requested that a vote be taken which resulted as follows: 
 
FOR: 
Bambury, Coleman, Collins J, Collins D, Harrington, Dalton-O’Sullivan, Fahy, 
O’ Callaghan, O’Donoghue, Coughlan M, Sheehan, Ahern, Buckley J, Horgan, 
Linehan Foley, Sexton 
 
 
[16] 
AGAINST:   Foley, Cronin, Buckley A, McCarthy U, White, Barry, Cotter, O’Flynn, Browne, 
Doyle, Murphy T, Lynch, Moynihan G, Madden, Murphy G, O’Shea T, 
Cocking, Hegarty, Gill, McCarthy B 
           [20] 
ABSTAIN:  
Moynihan B, Mulcahy, Kelly, 
[3] 
 
~   THIS CONCLUDED THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING   ~ 
 
