Cork County
Local Economic 
and Community 
Plan

42-159
SECTION 1  - Context and Background
4. About This Plan
8. Executive Summary
16. Plan Structure and Next Steps
17. Process of Preparing This Plan
18. Mission Statement
19. Introduction
22. What Do We Mean by ‘Cork’
24. National & Regional   Policy
Context
26. LECP High Level Goals
29. Overview of Approach to
Economic and Community
Development
38. Quality of Life
SECTION 2 - Key Cork Assets
45. Human Capital
52	 Employment / Income
58	 Urban Cork
62	 Rural Cork
66	 Connectivity
70. Community
73. Education
79. Research, Development & Innova
tion
84. Housing
88. Physical Infrastructure
93. Natural Environment & Climate
Change
97. Energy
100. Clustering
103. Export Markets
108. Tourism
111. Cost of Living
114. Cork Airport
117. Cork Harbour
121. Health
125. Family & Home Life
130. Social Inclusion
134. Multi-Culturalism
137. Social Activities
140. Arts, Culture and Heritage
143. Security
146. Regulatory Environment
149. Values				
152. Institutional Relationships
155. Data Co-Ordination
158. Reputation and Brand
161-258
SECTION 3 - Summary & Asset Management
4-42
161. Summary of Community &
Economic Objectives
162. Cork Asset Management  Maps
192. Cork Asset Management
Structures
195. Appendix 1-8
CONTENTS

Removal of barriers to 
facilitate individuals and 
organisations in achieving their 
Ambitions

4
 Local Economic And Community Plan
ABOUT THIS PLAN
This document describes how we want to organise our County over the coming years and some high 
level objectives for how this can be done. It takes into account National and Regional plans, surveys, 
and, has been compiled with the input and help of the people of County Cork. It will be used to 
guide the preparation of further plans that detail future local actions in your area.
This document was prepared in 2015/16 and will be reviewed and updated in approx. 18 months (on 
publication of the National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and economic Strategies).
The Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) is a new process and it will take a period of time to 
socialise the concepts that underpin this work. It is recommended that the following questions and 
answers are read in advance of engaging with this new plan.
Why has this plan been prepared?
This plan is the first step in a process that seeks to enhance the delivery of national social and 
economic policy at the local level. On completion of this public consultation, a final and more 
succinct LECP will be produced.
What is meant by a process?
This plan should be seen only as a first step, with subsequent steps to follow immediately. No single 
plan can address all of the varied ambitions of the population it represents. However, it can provide 
a framework from within which personal, social and economic opportunities can be stimulated.
How will the plan achieve this?
By identifying the things that are important to us (in community and economic terms) as people 
living in Cork County. These are described in the plan as our Key Assets.  Thereafter, the plan iden­
tifies structures to be established that will protect and enhance those Key Assets.
What are Key Assets?
Key Assets are identified as the things that – if managed well – will provide us with a high quality 
of life, as well as ensuring that we are provided with social and economic opportunities. Our Key 
Assets are physical (man-made and natural), personal, social, economic, and even psychological 
(our Values for example).
Why do we need new structures?
All the Key Assets identified as important to us are influenced by a range of agencies and stake­
holders. The new structures recommended in the plan seek to provide a renewed clarity of purpose 
to the collective actions of these groups within the Cork region.
Do these structures already exist?
Agencies and stakeholders already cooperate across many sectors and various collaborative working 
groups are in place. This plan seeks to support those existing working groups, with some new groups 
established around additional Key Assets.
Section 1 - Context and Background

5
Local Economic And Community Plan
So this plan is aimed at agencies and stakeholder groups?
This plan is for everyone – individual residents, communities, stakeholder groups, agencies (private 
and public) and government bodies. The plan has been developed following consultations with 
representatives from all of these sectors and it is hoped that representatives of all sectors will 
become actively involved in the next steps in the process.
 Why is providing opportunity important?
Opportunity is the key to harnessing our key social and economic raw material – people. By provid­
ing people with opportunities we give them the ability to fulfil their ambitions and to contribute to 
society in a positive manner. This benefits both the individual and society.
Is opportunity the key theme of this plan?
There are three key themes to this plan, as follows:
1. Vision – the plan seeks to provide clarity of purpose to our collective efforts in Cork
County, in order to make Cork County a place where you can achieve your ambitions (whatever 
those ambitions may be). This theme reflects the strategic focus of the Cork Brand Book. 
2.	Opportunity – the plan seeks to harness the collective endeavours of our public and pri­
vate stakeholders / agencies, in order to effectively manage the assets that contribute to us 
having opportunities
3.	Place – the plan seeks to again harness our collective endeavours, but in this instance
toward the creation of a choice of attractive and well-functioning places to live and work with­
in Cork County
How are those themes used in the plan?
Although a large document, the plan is constructed in a very simple way. The plan identifies 30 Key 
Assets and recommends that each asset be managed by a working group made up of key stake­
holders and appropriate agencies. It then allocates initial ‘opportunity actions’ and ‘place actions’ 
to those asset management groups. It finally identifies a structural framework within which the 
asset management groups can co-operate to ensure that the vision for Cork County is achieved.
Why is the plan a large document?
This document is a community and economic plan for Cork County. As such, it is required to address 
all of the important – and varied - aspects of life that contribute to our social and economic 
well-being. The plan making process has sought to do this in as succinct a manner as is possible 
and without repeating the work of other plans (such as, the Action Plan for Jobs, The Commission 
for the Economic Development of Rural Areas Report, Harvest 2020, Construction 2020, etc.). However, 
on completion of this public consultation, a final and more succinct LECP will be produced. The final 
LECP will reflect the thinking and findings of this draft plan, coupled with learnings achieved from 
this consultation.
Should I read only the part of the plan that matters to me?
There are 13 sections to this plan, in order to facilitate easy navigation within the document. Additional­
ly, the section that discusses our Key Assets (section 11) has a sub-section on each asset. The plan is 
structured as follows:
▯
Context and Background to the Plan:
Section 1 
▯
Key Assets:
	Section 2 (with a sub-section for each asset)
▯
Summary of Assets and Actions:
Section 3

6
 Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
Asset Management Structures:
Section 3
▯
Appendices:
            Includes Cork County Quality of Life Survey re­
sults also
Is this Local Economic and Community Plan similar to plans of other local authorities?
Cork County is very large and diverse, with diversity considered as a strength of the region. Hence, 
this plan must address the breadth and depth of community and economic issues relevant to Cork 
County. It is this diversity that has determined the form of this plan.
What does this plan not contain?
In accordance with government guidelines, this plan does not seek to be the repository of other 
plans and background data, but rather seeks to use those plans and data to support this plan.
This is a draft plan and feedback is sought from individuals and agencies. On receipt of feedback, 
the plan will be finalised and adopted by Cork County Council. Once adopted, the plan recommends 
that the Asset Management Groups be established to commence their collaborative work around 
each Key Asset identified. Asset sub-plans will be developed by each working group, ultimately 
leading to the development of a suite of low level actions plans for each asset.  
Abbreviation Within The Plan
APJ		
Action Plan for jobs
CASP 
Cork Area Strategic Plan 
CCC 		
Cork County Council
CDP 
County Development Plan
CEB 		
County Enterprise Board 
CIP 	
	
Capital Investment Plan 
CSAIP 		
Cork Science and Innovation Park
CSO 	
	
Central Statistics Office 
CZM 	
	
Coastal Zone Management 
CIT  	
	
Cork Institute of Technology
CFRAM  
Catchment Flood Risk Assessment Management
CEDRA  	
Commission on the Economic Development of Rural Areas (CEDRA)
DAA 	
	
Dublin Airport Authority
DoECLG 
Department of Environment Community and Local Government 
ECD 	
	
Economic Development Fund 
EPA 	
	
Environmental Protection Agency 
ESRI	
	
Economic and Social Research Institute
EIA 	
	
Environmental Impact Assessment
EU 		
European Union 
ERSI 	 	
Economic and Social Research Institute
EI  		
Enterprise Ireland
FDI 	
	
Foreign Direct Investment 
GIS 	
	
Geographical Information Systems
GAA  	 	
Gaelic Athletic Association
GVA  
Gross Value Added
GDP  
Gross Domestic Product
GNP  
Gross National Product
HDA  
Habitat Directive Assessment 
IAA 
Irish Aviation Authority 
ICT  
Information, Communication & Technology
IDA 
Irish Development Agency
IMERC	
Irish maritime and Energy Resource Cluster
JPC  		
Joint Policing Committee

7
Local Economic And Community Plan
KPI  
Key Performance Indicator
LAP 
Local Area Plan 
LCDC 
Local Community Development Committee
LECP 
Local Economic and Community Plan 
LEO 
Local Enterprise Office 
LUTS 
Land Use and Transportation Study
MANs 
Metropolitan Area Networks
NMCI 
National Maritime College of Ireland
NCCS 
National Climate Change Strategy 
NESC		
The National Economic and Social Council 
NSS   
National Spatial Strategy 
NWCSP   
North and West Cork Strategic Plan 
NBS     
National Broadband Scheme 
NDP     
National Development Plan 
NPF  
National Planning Framework
NRP  
National Reform Programme 
NRPE  
National Research Priorities Exercise 
NPP  
National Ports Policy
NPWS  
National Parks & Wildlife Service
NRA  
National Roads Authority 
NSS  
National Spatial Strategy 
NAP  
Inclusion  National Action Plan for Social Inclusion
OECD   
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OPW  
Office of Public Works
Qo L  
Quality of Life 
PHC’s  
Primary Healthcare Centres 
POWCAR  
Place of Work Census of Anonymised Records
PPN 
Public Participation Network
RESE 
Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies 
RBD 
River Basin District 
RBMP  
River Basin Management Plans
RDI   
Research, Development & Innovation
R&D  
Research & Development
SAC   
Special Area of Conservation 
SEA  
Strategic Environmental Assessment 
SEAI  
Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland 
SFRA  
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
SEO  
Strategic Environmental Objective
SLAP    
Special Local Area Plan 
SME  
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
SPA 
Special Protection Area 
SPA 
Strategic Planning Areas 
SPC  
Strategic Policy Committee
SWRAPJ	
South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 
SWRPG  
South West Regional Planning Guidelines 
SWRBMP  
South Western River Basin Management Plan 
SWOT  
Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats  
UCD   
University College Dublin
UCC   
University College Cork
WSIP  
Water Services Investment Programme
WSSP  
Water Services Strategic Plan
WWTP  
Wastewater Treatment Plant
WFD   
Water Framework Directive
NMCI 
National Maritime College of Ireland

8
 Local Economic And Community Plan
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Foreword
Places that have a clear vision, that offer opportunities and that are pleasant to live in, are the 
places where people want to live. In turn, investment is drawn to those places to where people are 
attracted. Hence, if we can collectively make Cork a high quality place to live, focus on providing 
opportunities to residents and set our endeavours within a long-term sustainable strategy, we will 
set the foundation for Cork’s continued success.  
Overall, Cork has performed well in recent decades across a wide range of socio-economic 
considerations. This has resulted in Cork providing a high quality of life offering to residents and 
has contributed to the attraction of significant inward investment. However, emerging issues will 
challenge Cork’s ability to continue in this regard – as they will challenge other locations.
In providing a future vision for Cork, this plan seeks to identify the key assets that have underpinned 
Cork’s overall success as well as those that will be critical to its development in the future. By 
managing these assets successfully, this plan seeks to establish a process within which we can – 
collectively – ensure that Cork can compete internationally as a flourishing place to live and work. 
This plan is only the first step in a process that it is hoped will result in the development of a Future 
Cork that is reflective of an ambitious, inclusive and modern society. However, this does not require 
the wheel to be re-invented, as much good work and productive collaborations are already in place 
within the region. The process that this plan seeks to stimulate will be built upon our existing, solid 
socio-economic foundations. This first LECP will be reviewed on publication of the NPF and the RSES 
and will be amended to ensure compatibility with same.
Added Value of LECP
It is hoped that this LECP process will benefit Cork, by; 
▯
Providing a renewed focus for our collective destination as a region – economically
and socially
opportunity
Place
Remove Barriers to Opportunity
Clarity of Vision & Long Term 
Strategy
Attractive & Well 
Organised
vision

9
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
Using innovative language to describe what is economically and socially important to
us (our Key Assets)
▯
Providing a roadmap for our collective endeavours, toward the reaching of our desired
destination
▯
Providing a methodology to allow us to measure, monitor and promote our economic
and social progress
This, it is hoped, will be achieved via:
▯
Identification of the key issues that will inform County Cork’s future social and eco­
nomic performance
▯
Identify the Key Assets – personal, social, economic and environmental – that underpin
County Cork’s overall socio-economic offering
▯
Construct a process, that involves all stakeholders (residents, representative organisa­
tions, public and private) and delivery agencies, to facilitate the protection and en­
hancement of those Key Assets identified
▯
Stimulate the development of a Cork Asset Index to measure, monitor and promote the
performance of Cork’s Key Assets and, by extension, our socio-economic performance
and quality of life offering
LECP – A Process 
This plan is not intended to be an end in itself, but should be viewed as part of a larger ongoing 
regional process, as follows.
Attract 
Investment
Value
(Assets)
Behaviours
(Actions)
Reputation
& Brand
Investment supports and 
enhances our assets
What we value (our Assets) 
informs our behaviour
Our reputation/brand makes Cork 
an attractive place to work and 
live
Our behaviour determines our 
reputation/brand

10
This plan, in accordance with the Local Economic and Community Plan Guidelines 2015, identifies 
Objectives (Key Assets) and recommends Actions linked to those assets. However, this plan also 
sets out a roadmap / framework as to how those assets can be collectively managed, as well as 
identifying a strategy to monitor those assets and to use that monitoring process to promote the 
Cork region in order to maximise inward investment (human and capital). In doing so, it is hoped 
that this LECP process will ensure the future forward momentum of the cycle identified in the above 
graphic. 
Background to LECP
The Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) is provided for in the statutory Local Government 
Reform Act 2014. This Act requires that a six-year plan be adopted by Cork County Council, setting 
out high level goals, objectives and actions required to promote and support local economic and 
community development within the county. 
The strategic aim of this Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP) is, ultimately, the: 
This strategic aim seeks to absorb and reflect the breadth and complexity of modern life, where 
opportunities exist for individuals and organisations to fulfil their ambitions, whether personal, 
economic or social. Places and societies that best provide for those ambitions, within a sustainable 
framework, are the places where people want to live and work. In turn, places where people want 
to live are the places that become socially and economically relevant.
Impediments – be they linked to issues around physical, organisational, environmental, economic, 
educational, equality, access, or related to any of the other aspects of our collective lives – are the 
barriers to our ambitions. This plan seeks to commence a process that will lead to removal of those 
barriers by those with the capacities to do so.  
Evolving National and Regional Context
While, by regulation, the LECP is to be developed within a six-year cycle, the first iteration of this 
plan will be reviewed and updated on publication of the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy 
(RSES) for the south-west region – expected to be published within approx. 12 months of this LECP. 
It is also recognised that the first iteration of this LECP is being developed whilst awaiting the 
publication of the National Planning Framework. It is hoped that this first LECP will assist in inform­
ing the work of the National Planning Framework (NPF) and, thereafter, the Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy. This first LECP will be reviewed on publication of the NPF and the RSES,   and 
will be amended to ensure comparability with same.
The LECP process is new, ambitious and seeks to chart a new path for the delivery of national policy 
at the local level. Having regard to its new beginnings and the need to review the first LECP within 
the short-term, it is recognised that a period of evolution will occur – where the LECP will evolve 
Removal of barriers to facilitate individuals and organisations in 
achieving their ambitions, within a long-term and sustainable framework
 Local Economic And Community Plan

11
Local Economic And Community Plan
over the coming years adding additional detail and nuance as it evolves as a project. 
As set down in the South West region Action Plan for Jobs 2015:
The new streamlined regional planning structures provide opportunities for increased co-operation 
over wider geographic areas (including at inter, intra and sub-regional levels as appropriate). In this 
regard, and to reflect the important contribution regional spatial planning will play in sustaining 
the national recovery and delivering balanced growth, the Regional Planning Guidelines will be 
replaced by new Regional Spatial & Economic Strategies (RSESs) in 2016 ... Key considerations for the 
Southern RSES will include identifying and promoting key priority projects for investment that will 
drive forecasted demographic and economic growth in a manner that maximises returns to the 
region from (1) the internationally important Cork City, County Metropolitan Cork and the Greater 
Cork Ring Strategic Planning Area ... and (3) maximises opportunities to develop dynamic rural-based 
communities. 
Sources: Action Plan for Jobs 2015 and Towards a National Planning Framework 2016
National
Planning
Framework
2016-2026
Regional
Spatial and Economic
Strategy
Local Economic 
and Community Plans
Local Area Plans
Area Based / Local Development
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
DETAILED PROPOSALS
City and County 
Development Plans

12
Collaborative Effort
Cork County Council, while facilitating the development of this plan, recognises that this project is 
wholly dependent on collaboration between all stakeholders – private/public, organisational/indi­
vidual. It is further recognised that in order to achieve support for actions to be taken, the first LECP 
must reflect the collective socio-economic ambitions of all Cork stakeholders. Through agreed, 
co-ordinated actions Cork can advance as a prosperous, modern and forward-thinking region, with 
a high quality of life offering. 
Consultation Learnings
This plan is underpinned by a significant consultation process, with institutional and personal in­
teraction having already been engaged with across the social and economic spheres. In addition to 
many submissions relating to specific issues, the following strategic oversights emerged: 
▯
Overall Cork is performing well, socially and economically – but with some marginal­
ised groups and sectoral deficiencies
▯
Sustaining Cork’s success will come under increased pressure due to a range of social,
environmental and economic factors
▯
There is a strong desire for leadership and a sense of common purpose in the Cork
region
▯
There is a need for clarity of purpose at a national level, in order to provide a platform 
for future regional progression
Strategic Context
Our human capital – our residents – is our most important socio-economic resource. Economically, 
it is people who drive our productivity, our creativity and our overall economic performance, while 
also providing a domestic market for our goods. Socially, they determine the type of place within 
which we live and the overall quality of life that we have to offer. Our human capital is central to 
the future of our economy and our community. 
At the beginning of the last century, Cork and Dublin populations were comparable – at approx. 
400,000 persons each. However, since the early 1900s the Irish demographic trend has been dom­
inated by a) emigration to other countries and b) internal migration to the Greater Dublin and 
Leinster region. This has resulted in Cork’s overall population only growing by approx. 115,000 in the 
past 115 years – a rate of only 1,000 additional population on average per year, although this annual 
average growth rate has been much stronger in the past twenty years. 
Growing and sustaining our overall population, by a rate significantly higher than our historical 
average, is central to ensuring our economic and social relevance into the future. 
Additionally, like all other areas in Ireland and across Europe, the Cork region will come under in­
creasing pressure in the coming decades, as the older cohort of our population will increase relative 
to our overall population. Economically it is critical to maintain a high ratio between those residents 
who are economically active and those who are not (young, retired, unemployed). Socially, it is 
important to seek to retain our younger population in order to support our ageing communities.   

13
Local Economic And Community Plan
1.
Human Capital
2.
Employment / Income
3.
Urban Cork
4.
Rural Cork
5.
Connectivity
6.
Community
7.
Education
8.
Research, Development & Inno-	
	 	
	
vation
9.
Housing
10.
Physical Infrastructure
11.
Natural Environment & Climate
Change
12.
Energy
13.
Clustering
14.
Export Markets
15.
Tourism
16.
Cost of Living
17.
Cork Airport
18.
Cork Harbour
19.
Health
20.
Family & Home Life
21.
Social Inclusion
22.
Multiculturalism
23.
Social Activities
24.
Arts, Culture & Heritage
25.
Security
26.
Regulatory Environment
27.
Values
28.
Institutional Relationships
29.
Data Co-Ordination
30.
Reputation & Brand
Growing our workforce, by creating a social and economic environment that is attractive to the 
economically active age-groups, is critical to the region’s socio-economic future.  
Cork Assets
Essentially, the LECP – via the identification of key social and economic assets - seeks to reflect 
what it is that Cork residents value, what Cork’s strengths are, what Cork’s ambition is, what investors 
desire, and, how stakeholders might co-ordinate to protect and enhance those Key assets.
The Key assets identified within the Cork region are listed below. These assets have been identified 
via consultation with a wide range of stakeholders from across the broad socio-economic spectrum, 
via a review of Government policy and through consultation with Cork County residents through the 
Cork County Quality of Life Survey. Put simply, this is a list of the recommended key assets that Cork 
either has developed or needs to develop, in order to protect and enhance Cork’s economy and 
communities.
(Note: The implementation framework outlined later in this plan allows for this asset list to be 
reduced, expanded or modified as required. This list should be seen as dynamic, to be reviewed 
periodically). 
Cork Assets

14
These assets reflect the collective endeavours that underpin Cork’s overall quality of life offering 
– social, economic, environmental and personal. This plan seeks to offer a vision and framework to
all agencies – public and private - and individuals, to co-ordinate our collective efforts (centred on
these assets) in order to facilitate residents (and future residents) of Cork in achieving their ambi­
tions.
Asset Management
While this plan identifies Cork’s Key Assets, it also recommends a post-LECP process to protect and 
enhance those Key Assets. It is proposed that each asset will be managed by an Asset Management 
Group, consisting of key stakeholders and key delivery agencies linked to that asset, led by a local 
Lead Agency. 
In turn, it is proposed that the outputs of this suite of Asset Management Groups will be co-ordinated 
by an Asset Management Co-Ordination Group (consisting of representatives of the Local Community 
Development Committees, Economic Strategic Policy Committee, Lead Agencies and key stakeholders). 
It is further recommended that the overall process be overseen and co-ordinated at the strategic 
level by an Asset Management Forum (consisting of representatives of senior management from 
key regional stakeholders and delivery agencies, private and public sector). 
This asset management approach to safeguarding and improving our social and economic well-
being reflects:
▯
The key assets that affect all our daily lives and underpin our regional strength 
▯
Current Government policy focus
▯
The importance of agency interaction – public and private
▯
Importance of efficiencies achieved via mutually supportive inter-agency actions
▯
The corporate integrity of private and public agencies
▯
The future-proofing of the region
▯
Ireland’s future needs
As part of this asset management approach, the development of a Cork Asset Index is a potentially 
powerful tool in the monitoring and promotion of the Cork region. It is envisaged that each Asset 
Management Group will feed their monitoring outputs into a regional index that can be used to 
identify what Cork has to offer – economically and socially.  
These overall asset management structures and the Cork Asset Index, it is envisaged, will provide 
a collective clarity of purpose within the Cork region, co-ordinate the regional endeavours of all key 
stakeholders and delivery agencies, maximise the attraction of investment – human and capital, 
maximise the cross-sectoral benefits of investment, and, be a powerful tool in the promotion of 
the Cork region.  

15
Local Economic And Community Plan
LECP Management Structure
Asset Management
Co-Ordination 
Groups
Asset 
Management 
Forum
Employment 
/Income
Human
Capital
Urban
Cork
Rural
Cork
Education
Connectivity
Community
R+D &
Inovation
Housing
Physical
Infrastruture
Natural
Environment
& Climate
Change
Energy
Clustering
Export
Markets
Tourism
Cork
Harbour
Cork
Airport
Cost
of
Living
Health
Family &
Home-
Life
Social
Inclusion
Arts
Culture
Heritage
Multi-
Culturalism
Social
Activities
Values
Security
Regulatory
Environment
Institutional
Relationships
Data
Co-ordination
Reputation
& Brand
CORK
ASSET
INDEX
Proposed LECP Asset Management Structures
Cork Asset Management Forum is
 recommended as a strategic oversight 
group consisting of interagency senior 
management and stakeholder 
representatives 
Cork Asset Management Co-Ordination 
Group is recommended as an operational 
oversight group consisting of Econ SPC, 
LCDCs, Lead Agency and Stakeholder 
representatives
Asset Management Groups 
Comprising of stakeholder 
& delivery agencies
ACTIONS BY 
DELIVERY AGENCIES

16
Section 1 of this plan sets out the introduction and context for the LECP. 
Section 2 sets out the Key Cork Assets, a brief description of their relevance, the asset management 
goal for each asset and the action(s) for each asset. 
Section 3 sets out an implementation structure, a summary of the Key Assets and initial Actions. 
The appendices set out the linkages between the LECP and the National Reform Programme, South 
West Regional Planning Guideline and the Cork County Development Plan, as well as the outputs 
from the Cork County Quality of Life Survey and a proofing of the plan. 
Next Steps
The LECP is not primarily a plan, but rather it is a process. Hence, to be effective it seeks the 
engagement and on-going support of all stakeholders. The assets identified in this plan, and their 
management methodology set out, are offered as a focus for that engagement and as a vehicle for 
mutually-supportive collective interactions. 
During this second consultation period, it is hoped that all residents and stakeholders will engage 
with this LECP and provide feedback to be absorbed into the final plan. 
On adoption of the final LECP, it is intended that Asset Management Groups will be formed to progress 
and monitor the performance of each asset and a Cork Asset Index (Cork AI) developed. 
The Local Community Development Committees, as area based representative bodies, will have a 
key role in determining priorities for their respective constituencies, via interaction with the various 
Asset Management Groups and the Asset Management Co-Ordination Group. 
Similarly, the Economic Strategic Policy Committee will have a central role to play in informing and 
directing the management of key economic assets, again via their interaction with the various Asset 
Management Groups and the Asset Management Co-Ordination Group. 
PLAN STRUCTURE & NEXT 
STEPS

17
Local Economic And Community Plan
The process set out below is reflective of government guidance, as well as recommendations received 
from stakeholders during initial consultation. We are currently at Stage 3 in the process – consul­
tation on the draft Local Economic and Community Plan. 
PROCESS OF PREPARING 
THIS PLAN
Preparation  of Background Doc­
ument & Initial Consultation with 
Public and Stakeholders
Finalise LECP
Develop LECP Vision, 
Objectives, Goals & 
Action Areas
Public & Stakeholder 
Consultation on  Draft 
LECP Vision, Objectives, 
Goals & Action Areas
5
2
Implement Action 
Areas, Monitor and 
Review LECP

18
 Local Economic And Community Plan
MISSION STATEMENT
Following initial public and stakeholder consultation, the LECP process has identified as its mission:
Removal of barriers to facilitate individuals and organisations 
in achieving their ambitions, within a long-term and sustainable 
framework
The removal of barriers to facilitate individuals and organisations in achieving their 
ambitions ... forward-thinking places are inclusive and ambitious. In preparing this plan, the 
stakeholders have informed this process, stating that they want to work together to make Cork a 
place where people can live the life that they choose – reflective of their own priorities. This is 
achievable, via the removal of barriers to our individual and collective ambitions. 
... Within a long-term and sustainable framework ... however, in facilitating our ambitions, 
we must also be mindful that we cannot take a solely short-term perspective. We must also ensure 
that the directions we take are sustainable. The word sustainable, as used in this document, means 
that ‘we have considered - and will continue to consider - the long-term net consequences on the 
natural environment (locally and globally), as well as on our personal and social well-being, choosing 
a route that is most likely to give the best possible outcome.’ 

19
Local Economic And Community Plan
INTRODUCTION
Modern opportunities across the personal, social and economic spheres have increased decade 
after decade, accelerating in particular since the mid-1800s when energy expansion led to a 
technological revolution via specialisation. That revolution continues, from global transportation 
in the last century, to modern telecommunications in this century. 
Within our increasingly complex societies - underpinned by a dynamic global economy and ever-
changing supporting natural environment – personal, political and public policy choices have become 
increasingly complex. 
Traditionally, financial market measures have been used to determine our success across the broad 
spectrum of human endeavour. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross National Product (GNP), 
among a range of financial indices, have been used to underpin this ongoing narrative. However,   
while income levels are demonstrated to have measurable impact on happiness and personal 
satisfaction, increase in incomes shows diminishing returns at the higher levels. Hence, it is accepted 
that income is only one of a range of factors – albeit very important - that influence personal and 
community well-being. 
This plan seeks to offer a modern, collective vision for County Cork, underpinned by the identification 
of specific socio-economic assets that can be enhanced if inter-agency co-operation is well organised. 
It also offers a methodology to identify and deliver specific, progressive actions around those key 
assets.
Our individual and collective well-being is enhanced by conditions that include:
▯
Financial and personal security
▯
Meaningful and rewarding work
▯
Supportive personal relationships
▯
Strong and inclusive communities
▯
Good health
▯
A healthy and attractive environment
▯
Values of democracy and social justice
Public policy and private enterprise seek to secure these conditions in order to allow residents, as 
individuals and as a collective society, to thrive. 
The LECP seeks to facilitate this on-going process, by reconciling the desires of residents at a local 
level with the country’s national goals and targets, as set down in the government’s National Reform 
Programme (NRP). The NRP gives direction to our collective work towards agreed high level goals 
for the nation, and, it is the function of the LECP to describe how the NRP can be delivered at the 
local level. 

20
Context
However, rather than being simply a distillation of government national policy, this LECP presents 
an opportunity to facilitate an on-going conversation that allows local opinion, knowledge and 
expertise to inform how government policy is most effectively implemented. The socio-economic 
statement issued as part of the initial LECP public consultation process (June 2015) was the first 
step toward building a bridge between national targets and local ambitions. 
This project is an opportunity to co-ordinate the activities of all stakeholders – public sector, private 
sector, economic sector, community sectors, local agencies, regional agencies, national agencies 
and individual citizens, toward achieving our collective goals for Cork – and by extension, for Ireland. 
The LECP project is driven initially by Cork County Council, in conjunction with its Economic 
Strategic Policy Committee and Local Community Development Committees. Thereafter, 
it will be required to be driven by all stakeholder agencies, groups and individuals. 
The LECP represents a transition phase toward further alignment, integration and implementation 
of local, regional and national policy – to be set out and aligned via the future National Planning 
Framework, Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies, and, Local Economic and Community Plans. 
At the local level, these strategic plans will be underpinned by sectoral and spatial strategic / 
actions plans that give low level effect to the higher policy directions. The roll out and alignment 
of all these plans will take some time, but will need to be underpinned by a clear, agreed collective 
vision. 
It is initially critical to establish an effective process that will facilitate the development, socialisation, 
adoption – and ultimately protection – of a social and economic vision for Cork County. This vision 
must be relevant at a local, regional and national level, and this plan seeks to establish this process 
in order to give initial direction to this ambitious project. 
Strategic Focus, Goals & Actions
Having regard to the breadth and depth of issues that inform the combined efforts of the county’s 
community and economic sectors, the first iteration of the LECP does not seek to identify specific, 
project level actions. Rather, this is an ongoing project that must first clearly identify – and agree 
with all stakeholders - our collective goals. By agreeing where we are going, it will be possible to 
identify thereafter the actions required to get there. 
This project will of course be guided by established national, regional and local policy, however, it 
will also seek to inform future policy decisions at these levels that have the potential to impact on 
Cork’s future. Hence, this plan will be both a conduit for existing policy implementation and a 
platform for future policy development. 
Through the identification of key issues relevant to County Cork, the LECP seeks to identify Key 
Assets that will inform the future work of the LCDCs, Economic SPC, complementary service delivery 
agencies and key stakeholders during the first plan life cycle. However, this initial LECP will be 
required to be reviewed on adoption of the Regional Socio-Economic Strategies and the National 
Planning Framework –approx. mid-2017. 
The LECP Background Socio-Economic Document previously issued to support the public consultation 

21
Local Economic And Community Plan
phase of this project, sets out the process and context for the development of the LECP. This plan 
seeks to focus on the emerging vision, goals, actions and next steps toward the safeguarding and 
improving of quality of life (economic and social) for all living in County Cork. 
Social and Economic
Regarding this plan, an important point of note is the relationship between social and economic 
considerations. While there is an understandable desire to separate social and economic actions, 
it almost always holds that actions in one sphere impacts upon the other – such as in education, 
employment, transport, etc. 

22
 Local Economic And Community Plan
WHAT DO WE MEAN BY 
CORK
Cork is a metropolitan-based region, consisting of a number of distinct strategic spatial areas. These 
strategic areas – as identified in the map below – have overlapping but also distinct characteristics. 
However, as is the case in all city-based regions, the Cork region is ultimately defined by its prox­
imity and level of connectedness with its core area of critical mass – Metropolitan Cork.  For clari­
ty,the term 'Cork Region' as used in this plan, refers to Cork County Council's operational area - but 
also recognises the important relationship of Cork County with Cork City. 
Cork’s Strategic Planning Areas
Urban settlements interact with surrounding settlements in a very similar way to planets – the 
gravitation pull of the dominant urban area increases by its size and by its proximity to the surrounding 
town, villages and rural areas. We have a very pronounced example of this in Ireland in the form of 
the Greater Dublin Area. As ‘urban Dublin’ (its city and contiguous urban hinterland) grew over the 
past decades, so too did those settlement areas outside of Dublin – but within its ‘gravitational 
pull.’ As urban Dublin continues to grow, so too does its influence on towns and villages within 
Leinster. 
A similar dynamic, albeit less pronounced, occurs in Cork. Cork City has a population of approx. 
120,000 coupled with a County Metropolitan population of approx. 170,000. This combined approx. 
North Strategic Planning Area
Census Pop 2011: 50,489
Greater Cork Ring Strategic Planning Area 
Census Pop 2011: 118,418
West Strategic Planning Area
Census Pop 2011: 60,377
County Metropolitan Strategic 
Planning Area
Census Pop 2011: 170,509
Cork City: 
Census Pop 2011: 119,230

23
Local Economic And Community Plan
population of 300,000 essentially represents ‘urban Cork’ – a single population unit that is connected 
to a high degree by its internal socio-economic interactions. 
Outside of Metropolitan Cork, the Greater Cork Ring area consists of approx. 120,000 population. 
While again this area is connected in social and economic terms to ‘urban Cork’, it’s relationships 
in this regard has its own characteristics influenced by its distance from the urban core. 
Further north and west, an additional dynamic exists– again due to separation distances with ‘urban 
Cork’ – where approx. 110,000 population in total reside. This plan in no manner suggests that, due 
to its further distance from ‘urban Cork’ that these areas are less relevant. This plan simply recognises 
that the socio-economic dynamic in each part of the county is influenced by its level of connectedness 
to ‘urban Cork.’ This plan identifies Rural Cork as an important socio-economic asset that needs to 
be protected and enhanced within a successful future for Cork.  
The OECD - reflecting on modern social, employment and economic profiles – states that the 
connections between cities and surrounding areas influence natural growth performance and quality 
of life. It further states that policies need to be tailored to the variety of urban profiles and growth 
models. (Redefining Urban: A New Way To Measure Metropolitan Areas, 2012). 
Reflecting the OECD narrative as set out, Cork is a city-based region that can essentially be divided 
into two distinct areas - a population of approx. 400,000 that resides within an approx. 45 minute 
car journey of Cork City centre and a further important hinterland population of approx. 100,000 
that has less pronounced, but nonetheless very important, socio-economic connections with the 
urban core. 
Policy development and implementation must be mindful of the distinct, but overlapping, area-
based characteristics and concerns of all Cork residents.  
For clarity, the term ‘Cork Region’ as used in this plan, refers to Cork County Council’s operational 
area – but also recognises the important relationship of Cork County with Cork City.
Drive Time Analysis From Cork City
Source: NIRSA
Mains Towns
30 Min Peak Journey Time
45 Min Peak Journey Time 
60 Min Peak Journey Time
CASP Boundry

24
National policy exists across a range of issues and operational areas – health, employment, housing, 
education, equality, security, and many more. This plan does not seek to be simply a literature review 
of those policies, rather it wishes to create a framework where all of the government’s operational 
areas can be facilitated in their delivery. 
In particular, this plan and process is linked of the National Reform Programme and the National 
Planning Framework (currently under consideration). 
The National Reform Programme identifies five Key Objectives – reflecting the Key Priorities of the 
European Union - listed as:
▯
Employment
▯
R&D / Innovation
▯
Climate Change / Energy
▯
Education, and,
▯
Poverty / Social Inclusion
This plan offers a sixth Key Objective which it is believed, following a consultative process, merits 
inclusion at the top policy level: 
▯
Receiving Environment
It is offered herein that these six operational areas are the Key Objectives guiding our national 
policy endeavours at the local level. 
National Planning Framework
The National Planning Framework, currently under consideration by Government, is the successor 
to the National Spatial Strategy (NSS). Recognising, in the national context, the dominant econom­
ic role played by the Greater Dublin Area, the NSS identified as a key priority the need to build other 
places and areas to be similarly strong on a national and international scale — generating benefits 
closer to where people live. 
Hence, the outcomes of the future National Planning Framework will have a critical role in shaping 
Cork’s future, as it will guide the Government’s strategic investment programme under the Nation­
al Reform Programme.
NATIONAL & REGIONAL 
POLICY CONTEXT

25
Local Economic And Community Plan
This LECP seeks to, at once, deliver the current national community and economic priorities via co-
ordinated regional actions, but to also influence the development of national policy by highlighting 
the economic and social growth potential of the Cork region. 
Action Plan for Jobs & Regional Planning
The Southern Region Assembly has been established and is commencing its work on the development 
of the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy (RSES) for the southern region. The RSES will replace 
the current Regional Planning Guidelines (RPGs) published in 2010. 
This LECP is set within the context of the existing RPGs, however, it will also be reviewed following 
publication of the RSES to ensure continued compatibility. 
As set down in the South West region Action Plan for Jobs 2015:
The new streamlined regional planning structures provide opportunities for increased co-operation 
over wider geographic areas (including at inter, intra and sub-regional levels as appropriate). In this 
regard, and to reflect the important contribution regional spatial planning will play in sustaining 
the national recovery and delivering balanced growth, the Regional Planning Guidelines will be 
replaced by new Regional Spatial & Economic Strategies (RSESs) in 2016 ... Key considerations for the 
Southern RSES will include identifying and promoting key priority projects for investment that will 
drive forecasted demographic and economic growth in a manner that maximises returns to the 
region from (1) the internationally important Cork City, County Metropolitan Cork and the Greater 
Cork Ring Strategic Planning Area, (2) supports the strategically important Tralee – Killarney axis 
and (3) maximises opportunities to develop dynamic rural-based communities. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
DETAILED PROPOSALS
Source: Action Plan for Jobs 2015
National
Planning
Framework
2016-2026
City & County 
Development Plans
Local Economic 
& Community Plans
Local Area Plans
Area Based / Local Development
Regional
Spatial & Economic 
Strategy

26
 Local Economic And Community Plan
LECP HIGH LEVEL GOALS
In Government policy terms, this plan is cognisant of the Key Objectives of the National Reform 
Programme, as discussed in the previous section. The key Cork assets identified in this LECP, following 
consultations with all stakeholders, reflect and encompass the Government’s work under its NRP. 
This plan seeks to merge the national priorities already developed (National Reform Programme) 
and those being developed (National Planning Framework) with the economic and social priorities 
of the Cork residents that this process seeks to serve. 
Following consultation with economic and community stakeholders, the following High Level Goals 
were identified to reflect the focus of the National Reform Programme and National Planning 
Framework at the local level. There are 23 High Level Goals identified and these goals have been 
absorbed into the identification of Cork’s Key Assets – as well as the Actions identified for each 
asset. 
Employment
R&D/Inovation
Climate Change
Energy
Education
Poverty/Social
Incusion
Receiving Enviroment

27
Local Economic And Community Plan
Employment
HLG 1: Provide for a wide range of employment opportunities, across the county, which enable 
all citizens to participate fully in society and the economy 
HLG 2: Provide for a physical economic network consisting of land, premises, facilities and 
supporting infrastructure 
HLG 3: Provide for a business environment and entrepreneurship that facilitates creation, in­
novation and growth within the sector 
HLG 4: Promote Cork as Ireland’s Second City Region and facilitate population growth above 
the natural growth rate, increasing the local economic market and workforce 
HLG 5: Provide for access to other markets, nationally and internationally
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT / INNOVATION
HLG 1: Drive growth through research and innovation, across social and economic sectors and 
throughout the county 
HLG 2: Provide for the capturing, protecting and commercialising of ideas and know-how, large 
and small in scale 
HLG 3: Provide for the building of a world class research network within Cork, linking existing 
and proposed institutes, physically and operationally 
CLIMATE CHANGE / ENERGY
HLG 1: Provide for the alignment of County Cork with the national targets for emission reductions
HLG 2: Provide for potential climate change impacts within County Cork, including adapt-ion
HLG 3: Ensure that our activities and places, existing and proposed, are robust in terms of 
energy choice 
HLG 4:Provide for the harnessing of County Cork’s energy potential, including the protection 
of Cork’s locational and other energy assets 
HLG 5: Provide for the creation of a local circular economy model of sustainability
EDUCATION
HLG 1: Provide for education and training opportunities that facilitate all learners in accessing 
the knowledge and skills they need to participate fully in society and the economy
HLG 2: Provide for the alignment of education and training opportunities with the social and 

28
 Local Economic And Community Plan
POVERTY / SOCIAL EXCLUSION
HLG 1: Provide for the removal of barriers that contribute to physical, social and economic 
exclusion, for all life stages 
HLG 2: Facilitate citizen engagement with social and economic opportunities
HLG 3: Provide for the recognition that all citizens are valued equally and have the potential 
to contribute to County Cork society in a positive manner 
HLG 4: Facilitate the enhancement of community identity, solidarity and civic engagement
HLG 5: Provide for access by all citizens to services that enhance their quality of life
RECEIVING ENVIRONMENT
HLG 1: Optimise the sustainable environmental receiving capacity of the County in order to 
facilitate planned for growth and change 
HLG 2: Provide for the physical enhancement of Cork County’s rural and urban places
economic needs and potential of the county 
HLG 3: Provide for opportunities for citizens to access information that will contribute to 
positive life choices 
IMAGES

29
Local Economic And Community Plan
OVERVIEW OF APPROACH TO 
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT
Context
Our human capital – our residents – is our most important socio-economic resource. Economically, 
they drive our productivity, our creativity and our overall economic performance, while also pro­
viding a domestic market for our goods. Socially, they determine the type of place within which we 
live and the overall quality of life that we have to offer. Our human capital is central to the future 
of our economy and our community.  
Population
At the beginning of the last century, Cork and Dublin populations were comparable – at approx. 
400,000 persons each. However, since the early 1900s the Irish demographic trend has been dom­
inated by a) emigration to other countries and b) internal migration to the Greater Dublin and 
Leinster region. This has resulted in Cork’s overall population only growing by approx. 115,000 in the 
past 115 years – a rate of only 1,000 additional population on average per year, although this annual 
average growth rate has been much stronger in the past twenty years. 
The Cork region is the second largest (by some margin) within the state, with significant social and 
economic assets. However, growing and sustaining our overall population, by a rate significantly 
higher than our historical average, is central to ensuring our economic and social relevance into the 
future.  
Age-Dependency
Additionally, like all other areas in Ireland and across Europe, the Cork region will come under in­
creasing pressure in the coming decades, as the older cohort of our population will increase relative 
to our overall population. Economically it is critical to maintain a high ratio between those residents 
who are economically active and those who are not (young, retired, unemployed). Socially, it is 
important to seek to retain our younger population in order to support our overall ageing commu­
nities. Growing our workforce, by creating a social and economic environment that is attractive to 
the economically active age-groups, is critical to the region’s socio-economic future. 
Spatial 
The Cork Area Strategic Plan has served the Cork region well in recent decades, underpinning our 
growth within that period. It has allowed us to expand the Cork regional population, while minimis­

30
ing the negative consequences often associated with growth. Our ability to organise ourselves, 
spatially and operationally, will ensure that future growth evolves into planned for expansion – 
maximising economic and community gains to be achieved.  
Additionally, as a large region, Cork is not homogeneous in socio-economic terms. Different locations 
within the County experience community and economic issues in various ways. However, all areas 
are socially and economically interconnected and the region does not in practice operate as sep­
arate divisions.  
Economic Overview
At the core of our economic performance is the maintenance of our relative per capita income. 
Hence, the immediate focus of this plan is to maximise the number and quality of regional employ­
ment, by identifying what is economically important and by facilitating the removal of any barriers 
to same. 
The Cork region is a very strong economic performer with nationally competitive employment rates, 
per capita income, productivity rates, etc. Metropolitan Cork in particular is the key driver of our 
regional economic performance within the South West Region. The Cork region has worked hard in 
recent years, and will continue to do so, to expand its employment base in order to provide eco­
nomic strength and stability to the region. 
Economic SWOT Analysis of Cork Region
▯
Overall regional population (Cork City and County) in excess of 500,000,
with 400,000 living within one hour of Cork’s urban core
▯
Significant natural assets, including, Cork Harbour, extensive agricultural
lands, extensive coastline and plentiful water supply 
▯
Significant built infrastructure, including, airport, harbour facilities, rail,
road, water and waste water, electricity and gas, and, renewable ener­
gies
▯
High quality natural environment
▯
History of productive institutional co-operation
▯
Network of urban settlements, providing choice to residents
▯
International fibre telecommunications linkage and broadband connectivity
▯
Cork International Airport
▯
Lower cost of living than the only larger urban area within the State (Dublin)
▯
Lower labour costs in Cork than in Dublin, based on competitive living costs
▯
One of the highest labour participation rates in Ireland
▯
One of the lowest overall age-dependency ratios in Ireland
▯
High conversion rates for education to work >Continued Overleaf
Strengths
1

31
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
Highly educated workforce, internationally recognised educational institutions and high
levels of collaboration between Higher Educational Institutes
▯
Nationally high per capita income and production outputs
▯
Recognition by Irish Government and Regional Authorities of importance of foreign in­
ward investment, competitiveness, exports, high skills base, entrepreneurship, education
and overall quality of life offering
▯
Significant tourism assets and tourism infrastructure
▯
Contains Ireland’s highest performing manufacturing sector – chemicals and pharmaceu­
ticals
▯
Continued growth in the internationally traded services sector
▯
Established clusters and continued inward investment in the pharmaceutical and bio­
technology sectors, medical equipment and devices sector, software development sector,
international services sector, agri-food sector and R&D activities
▯
Strong focus on manufacturing including, pharmaceuticals, medical technologies, food,
ICT and engineering / industrial products)
▯
High skills base overall, with particular expertise in engineering, manufacturing and ICT
sectors
▯
Growing entrepreneurial resources and recognition of importance of this growing sector
▯
Inward investment and Foreign Direct Investment second only to the Dublin region
▯
Existing research centres of excellence, such as, Tyndall National Institute, Alimentary
Pharmabiotic Centre, Governance Risk and Compliance Technology Centre, European Cen­
tre for Clinical Trials in Rare Diseases (UCC), Nimbus Centre, CAPPA, Halpin Centre, MEDIC,
Hincks Centre for Entrepreneurship Excellence (CIT), MaREI , Shannon ABC, Moorepark
Animal & Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Crean Centre for Entrepreneurship
and Enterprise Development, Irish Academy of Hospitality and Tourism (ITT), IMERC (Irish
Marine Energy Cluster), etc.
▯
Ongoing progression of Cork Science and Innovation Park
▯
Attraction of national National Health Innovation Hub
▯
Presence of internationally recognised University College Cork and Cork Institute of Tech­
nology
▯
Growing energy sector with increasing levels of collaboration between public and private
sectors
▯
Growing international partnerships, particularly with growing international markets, such
as China
▯
Presence of CUH, Mercy, SIVUH, Bon Secours and additional private hospital groups
▯
Consistent high rating in terms of overall quality of life offering – nationally and interna­
tionally
▯
Relatively low commuting times, significantly lower than those for the Greater Dublin Area
▯
Attractive location for foreign students >Continued Overleaf
▯
High quality international brand
▯
High quality retail offering

32
WEAKNESSES
2
▯
Identify Cork as the country’s second city region
▯
Grow the Cork region population, by absorbing a significant pro­
portion (approx. 25% / 30%) of the future national projected pop­
ulation increases up to 2046 – via engagement with national Plan­
ning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy
▯
Use the Action Plan for Jobs as a foundation to grow and diversity employment
▯
Continue to co-ordinate our collective endeavours, towards providing a cork voice
▯
Promotion of Cork region as internationally competitive / attractive to live and
work (already underway)
▯
Improved regulatory environment, increasing ease of doing business
▯
Generate even greater business and educational research / innovation links
▯
Continue to develop a research network within the region
▯
Develop further Strategic alliances e.g. Education etc.
▯
Continue to develop creativity and entrepreneurship skills
▯
Grow further Cork based exports, by targeting markets and managing logistics
▯
Grow further Cork tourism
▯
Further grow our agri-food sector
▯
Strengthen further our indigenous and FDI manufacturing investment in the re­
▯
Vibrant arts and cultural environment, supported by an educational network
▯
English speaking, but with increasing multi-lingual skills
▯
Slower historical population growth relative to Dublin region, not
withstanding improved performance since mid-1990s
▯
Higher costs base than competing European locations
▯
Cyclical provision of housing
▯
High cost of residential rental accommodation
▯
Low public transport provision and use than competing European locations
▯
Limited airport connectivity from Cork Airport, albeit improving
▯
Limited new office provision
▯
Limited foreign language skills in indigenous population
▯
Poor broadband penetration in rural areas
▯
Limited rural public transport connectivity
Opportunities
3

33
Local Economic And Community Plan
gion, building on established clusters of life sciences, ICT, global business servic­
es, global agri-food economy and emerging opportunities in marine and energy 
related research
▯
Develop rural enterprise, supported by extended broadband provision
▯
Develop economic cluster strategy for the Cork region
▯
Continue to enhance our innovation and entrepreneurship skills base
▯
Retain existing workforce, particularly targeting graduates to expand the region’s
knowledge based industries
▯
Attract the return of former residents who are working elsewhere
▯
Target foreign countries for students
▯
Work with industry to attract talent from abroad
▯
Co-ordinated international, national, regional and local public transportation
network
▯
Expand Cork Airport connectivity
▯
Facilitate the relocation of industrial tenants from Cork’s Upper Harbour
▯
Develop a strategic land use plan for the future Cork region, post- publication of
the NPF and RSES, to provide for future economic land use needs
▯
Expand Cork, targeting public transport-orientated development
▯
Co-ordination of economic data collection
▯
Develop a climate change adaption strategy for Cork region, in order to protect
economic investment
▯
Develop further strategic alliances within Cork (e.g. educations, etc.)
Threats
4
▯
Inability to consistently grow our regional population
▯
Ageing population
▯
Absence of clarity of purpose – locally, regionally and nationally
▯
Cost competitiveness – across all sectors
▯
Peripheral location, impacting on our connectivity – physical and
communications
▯
Cyclical nature of construction sector
▯
Shortfall of premises to meet economic needs – dependant on emerging growth
rates
▯
Absence of infrastructure investment
▯
Broadband roll-out, if not achieved across the region
▯
Cork City, Metropolitan Cork and the hierarchy of County Town and Rural Loca­
tions

34
▯
Overall regional population (Cork City and County) in excess of
500,000, with a range of diverse communities
▯
Significant built infrastructure, including, airport, harbour facilities,
rail, road, water and waste water, electricity and gas, and, renewa­
ble energies
▯
Community resilience
Having regard to the SWOT analysis set out above, it is recommended that our collective economic 
focus needs to incorporate the following:
▯
Retain and expand our workforce, via education and skills development
▯
Attract and create high value employment
▯
Maximise exports, via developing markets and managing logistics
▯
Continued diversification of our employment sectors, to facilitate future-proofing
▯
Target sustainable employment in rural areas
▯
Expand our tourism capacities, creating a connected network of offerings
▯
Ensure an adequate supply of land and suitable premises
▯
Advocate for advance infrastructure provision
▯
Enhance clusters and collaborations
▯
Provide for high levels of connectivity within the region – transport (for the movement of
materials, goods and people) and telecommunications (for the movement of information and
ideas)
▯
Remove barriers for those seeking to engage with third level accredited enterprise
focused programmes and those wishing to build capacity in local communities
The above analysis and focus has been absorbed into the identification of Assets and Actions 
identified within this plan. 
It is noted that the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017 is the primary vehicle for 
identifying how our employment base can be grown and diversified. This LECP seeks to support the 
APJ rather than fulfil the role of the APJ. The LECP seeks to achieve this by identifying and progress­
ing actions that complement the work of the APJ. 
Community Overview
Communities are at the heart of our society. They are the places where we live and often work, 
where our families are, where our friends are, and, where we largely interact with life. The 
family and community environments from which we emerge are significant determinants in the 
development of our human capital – our society, economic and social. However, barriers can 
exist within communities that frustrate this process. Community is also activity and interest 
based across a wide spectrum reflecting the breadth of life’s endeavors, such as, recreational, 
environmental, age, education, employment and many more interests around which people 
gather.
Strengths
1
Community SWOT Analysis of Cork Region

35
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
Community capacities supported by local authority, local development compa­
nies and government agencies
▯
High quality landscape
▯
High quality natural environment
▯
Network of urban settlements, providing choice to residents
▯
Lower cost of living than the only larger urban area (Dublin)
▯
Highly educated population
▯
Nationally high levels of employment
▯
Nationally high per capita income
▯
Recognition by Irish Government and Regional Authorities of importance of role
of communities
▯
High levels of volunteerism
▯
Cork region has a positive reputation for living and working
▯
High levels of satisfaction from residents regarding where they live
▯
High levels of pride among residents in their communities
▯
Cork residents feel well connected to their communities
▯
Cork residents feel safe in their homes and communities
▯
High levels of interactions within Cork communities
▯
Most Cork residents are members of a network or social group
▯
Cork residents value highly their home life and community
▯
Cork residents are healthy when compared nationally and also report feeling 
healthy
▯
Overall, Cork residents report themselves to be very happy and have a high
quality of life
WEAKNESSES
2
▯
Rural areas furthest removed from urban core experiencing popu­
lation and services decline
▯
Need to own at least one private vehicle
▯
Housing costs, for some age cohorts and locations, is high
▯
High childcare costs
▯
High cost of rental accommodation
▯
Low public transport use
▯
Poor broadband penetration in rural areas
▯
Limited rural public transport connectivity
▯
Limited provision of municipal recreational facilities, albeit improving
▯
Ageing population
▯
Distance of some areas from third level educational institutions

36
Opportunities
3
Threats
4
▯
Absence of population growth
▯
Ageing population
▯
Co-ordination – locally, regionally and nationally
▯
Cost competitiveness – particularly with regard to housing and
childcare
▯
Connectivity – physical and communications (broadband)
▯
Short-term policy focus
▯
Reduction in volunteerism and civic engagement
▯
Recognition of important economic role played by communities
▯
Cork City, Metropolitan Cork and the hierarchy of County Town and Rural Loca­
tions
▯
Develop Cork as the country’s second city region
▯
Co-ordinate our collective endeavours, towards providing a cork
voice
▯
Grow the Cork region population, by absorbing a significant pro­
portion (approx. 25/30%) of the future national projected popula­
tion increases up to 2046 – via engagement with national Planning
Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy
▯
Grow local employment, particularly in areas furthest from Metropolitan Cork
▯
Promotion of Cork region as internationally competitive / attractive to live and
work (already underway)
▯
Develop rural enterprise, supported by broadband provision
▯
Attract the return of former residents who are working elsewhere
▯
Co-ordinated international, national, regional and local public transportation
network
▯
Develop a strategic land use plan for the Cork region, on publication of the NPF
and RSES
▯
Expand Cork, targeting public transport-orientated development
▯
Co-ordination of social data collection
▯
Further develop capacities within communities
▯
Further develop shared social facilities within communities
▯
Assist communities as custodians of their local environment and heritage
▯
Facilitate communities in determining their future collective destination  
▯
Support innovation within communities
▯
Develop a climate change adaption strategy for Cork region to future-proof com­
munities from environmental change
▯
Develop further and support social enterprise
▯
Remove barriers for those seeking to engage with third>Continued Overleaf      level

37
Local Economic And Community Plan
Having regard to the SWOT analysis set out above, it is recommended that our collective commu­
nity focus needs to incorporate the following:
▯
Recognition that communities are where we live our lives – physically, socially and psycholog­
ically
▯
Recognition that community and volunteerism play an important economic role in our lives
▯
Strengthening and support the role that home life / family plays in our lives
▯
Create opportunities for residents to choose their own life–work balance
▯
Support leisure and recreation through communities
▯
Recognition of the role communities play as a vehicle for the protection and enhancement of
our natural environment, built environments, arts, culture and heritage
▯
Support the role communities and home life play in the development of our human capital
▯
Support communities in providing for our personal development
▯
Recognition that positive community activity supports the building of a healthy – physical
and mental – society
▯
Recognition of the important role that transport plays in facilitating communities
▯
Encourage and empower local communities to fully participate in decision making processes
The above analysis and focus has been absorbed into the identification of Assets and Actions 
identified within this plan. Encourage and empower local communities to fully participate in decision 
making processes.
accredited enterprise focused programmes and those wishing to build capacity 
in local communities

38
QUALITY OF LIFE
Amidst the strategic discussion on national policy priorities, key objectives and high level goals, it 
is important not to lose sight of why we are preparing this plan in the first instance. As the question 
posed during the first public consultation on this process asked, What Matters To You? 
This question can be used to summarise Government’s goals as expressed in Putting People First 
- Action Programme for Effective Local Government. The vision at the centre of that document stated 
that:
In the development of this leadership role for local authorities, the building of a bridge between 
national policy and local issues is critical. This Local Economic and Community Plan seeks to facil­
itate this coming together.
As stated previously, Government policy is clearly stated in a range of policy statements and op­
erational plans and strategically, under the National Reform Programme. To complement that ex­
isting policy body, the LECP process commissioned a Quality of Life Survey of its residents to assist 
in identifying ‘what matters to them.  
Internationally there is much debate regarding what issues inform our individual and collective 
quality of life, while priorities within those issues are also discussed widely. The National Econom­
ic and Social Council (NESC), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
and other bodies, have discussed at great length the issues surrounding our quality of life. However, 
regardless of the exact architecture used to construct the narrative on this topic, it is clear that 
agreement exists that while financial indices such as GDP and GNP are very important, we must also 
look beyond financial indicators to fully understand the concept that is our contentedness. 
It is critical at this juncture to acknowledge that quality of life is often seen as a primarily ‘social’ 
consideration. However, modern economic analysis and commentary is unambiguous in this regard. 
Overall quality of life is a key determinant in the choices that people make around their lives and 
work, and therefore, has a critical impact on attracting economic investment. 
Hence, set out below are the key overall findings of the first Cork County Quality of Life Survey. This 
was a countywide survey undertaken on behalf of the LECP process, in order to establish a bench­
Local government will be the main vehicle of governance and public service at local 
level - leading economic, social and community development, delivering efficient and 
good value services, and representing citizens and local communities effectively and 
accountably.

39
Local Economic And Community Plan
mark regarding our quality of life. It is anticipated that this survey work will be continued and updated 
at regular intervals in order to inform the future management of Cork’s Key Assets. 
2015 Cork County Quality of Life Survey – Results Overview:
▯
▯
92% of residents think that Cork is a great place to live
▯
▯
90% of residents think the place they live is either the same (45%) or better (45%) 
than it was 5 yrs ago
▯
▯
86% of residents feel a sense of pride in the way their area looks and feels
▯
▯
77% of residents think that their area is becoming home for an increasing number 
of people with different lifestyles and cultures
▯
▯
51% of residents think that their area has a rich and diverse arts scene 
▯
▯
As an average of various scenarios, 87% of residents feel safe in their area / 
home
▯
▯
89% of residents think that it is important to feel a sense of community in their 
neighbourhood
▯
▯
88% feel a sense of community in their neighbourhoods
▯
▯
79% of residents are members of a social group, as follows:
▯
▯
84% of residents drive their private car every day
▯
▯
62% of all residents are satisfied with public transport in their area
▯
▯
85% of residents who use public transport at least monthly are satisfied
The following are the aspects of life that residents feel are the main things that are 
important to them:
▯
▯
Family and home life	
	
– 91%
▯
▯
Physical health	 	
	
– 62%
▯
▯
Personal happiness     		
– 60%
▯
▯
Friendship	
	
	
– 48%
▯
▯
Employment	
	
	
– 36%
▯
▯
Mental health	
	
	
– 31%
▯
▯
Suitable accommodation	
– 30%
▯
▯
Money and prices	
	
– 28%
▯
▯
Education	
	
	
– 27%
▯
▯
Personal beliefs	  	
	
– 17%
▯
▯
Social values	
	
	
– 16%
▯
▯
Religion	 	
	
	
– 13%
▯
▯
Natural environment 	 	
– 10%
▯
▯
Leisure activities	
	
– 8%
▯
▯
Equality	 	
	
	
– 8%
▯
▯
Holidays	 	
	
	
– 6%

40
 Local Economic And Community Plan
The above quality of life related outcomes are encouraging, with a significant majority of the overall 
population reporting a high quality of life rating. 
This survey has also produced results at Municipal District level and it is anticipated that future 
sub-county analysis will identify localised trends for action at the community level. These Municipal 
District level results can be used by the Local Community Development Committees and the Eco­
nomic Strategic Policy Committee to monitor performances at the local level and to benchmark 
results at the regional level. 
Within the findings of the survey, of particular note is the identification by residents of the things 
that are most important to them. In particular, family and home life, physical health, personal 
happiness and friendships are noted as being strongly valued by residents – reflecting the results 
▯
▯
Justice	
	
	
	
– 5%
▯
▯
Possessions	
	
	
– 3%
▯
▯
Other	
	
	
	
– 0%
▯
▯
88% of residents rate their overall health as being good
▯
▯
83% of residents are either satisfied or very satisfied with their life
▯
▯
80% of residents feel either happy or very happy
▯
▯
83% of residents consider their quality of life to be either good (56%) or very good 
(27%)
The main reasons reported as contributing residents’ high quality of life are:
▯
▯
Personal reasons	
	
– 57%
▯
▯
Health reasons	 	
	
– 16%
▯
▯
Professional reasons 	 	
– 11%
Reasons relating to area  you live:
	
	
	
▯
▯
Financial reasons	
	
– 3%
▯
▯
Other	
	
	
	
– 3%
▯
▯
Prefer not to say	
	
– 4%
▯
▯
55% of residents feel that their quality of life has remained the same over the 
past five years
▯
▯
23% of residents feel that their quality of life has improved over the past five 
years
▯
▯
86% of residents who are employed are either satisfied or very satisfied with their 
work / life balance

41
Local Economic And Community Plan
of similar surveys conducted internationally over many years. This key finding is at the heart of our 
collective endeavours and, hence, at the heart of this LECP process. 
Put simply, employment, income, public transport, education, wealth, etc. are critical tools – but 
they are only tools – in our achieving personal well-being. While engagement with employment, 
education and similar pursuits can be in themselves fulfilling, their fundamental purpose is as a 
supporting mechanism to our personal and collective (family and community) contentedness. 
This is not to suggest that by identifying our personal and collective satisfaction as the centrepiece 
of this conversation we are relegating economic considerations. Quite the contrary, population seeks 
out places that can provide a high quality of life and investment follows population. Hence, by 
providing for the things that people value most, we also provide the foundation for economic in­
vestment and prosperity.  

42
KEY CORK ASSETS
The following section of this plan describes the Cork region under a number of asset headings. 
These headings reflect the key strategic Cork assets identified via the consultations, research and 
consideration of Government policy that underpins this LECP. 
It is recommended that these issues, if managed well, will form a core body of Cork assets. Put 
simply, these are the potential strengths upon which the future Cork region can be built. 
It is important to note at this juncture that many plans, organisations and working groups are already 
in place to progress our region under the headings identified below. This LECP process seeks to 
build on those collaborative and productive efforts already being advanced (i.e. CASP, Energy Cork, 
Cork Smart Gateway, Joint Cork Housing Strategy, Cork Tourism Taskforce, Cork Building Our Brand 
Strategy, and many more similar collaborations).
It is also important to note that, as an economic and community process, this list of key Cork assets 
are likely to evolve over time – reflecting the dynamic nature of communities, environments and 
economies. The methodology employed within this process reflects this dynamism and the assets 
identified can be amended as required.
The following section of this plan describes the Cork region under a number of asset headings. 
These headings reflect the key strategic Cork assets identified via the consultations, research and 
consideration of Government policy that underpins this LECP. 
It is recommended that these issues, if managed well, will form a core body of Cork assets. Put 
simply, these are the potential strengths upon which the future Cork region can be built. 
It is important to note at this juncture that many plans, organisations and working groups are already 
in place to progress our region under the heading identified below. This LECP process seeks to build 
on those collaborative and productive efforts already being advanced (i.e. CASP, Energy Cork, Cork 
Smart Gateway, Joint Cork Housing Strategy, Cork Tourism Taskforce, Cork Building Our Brand Strat­
egy, and many more similar collaborations).
It is also important to note that, as an economic and community process, this list of key Cork assets 
are likely to evolve over time – reflecting the dynamic nature of communities, environments and 
economies. The methodology employed within this process reflects this dynamism and the assets 
identified can be amended as required.   
It should be further noted that:
▯
▯
Different assets represent different priorities to individuals and groups. This list seeks 
to encompass the assets that are central to the ambitions of all existing stakehold­
ers – economic and social – as well as potential future stakeholders (future residents, 
investors, etc.).
▯
▯
Some assets are performing well and need to be protected
▯
▯
Some assets only exist in part and need to be enhanced
Section 2 - Key Cork Assets

43
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
Some are new assets that need to be developed
▯
▯
Not all assets are of the same scale or complexity
▯
▯
Some assets will require significant energies applied, others not so much or very little 
actions at all
▯
▯
Assets can be social, natural, economic, physical, or psychological
▯
▯
Assets can be deleted, added or amended as the process evolves
   
Key Cork Assets Identified
1.		
Human Capital
2.		
Employment / Income
3.		
Urban Cork
4.	
Rural Cork
5.		
Connectivity
6.	
Community	
	
	
7.		
Education
8.	
Research, Development and Innovation
9.		
Housing
10.	
Physical Infrastructure
11.	
Natural Environment and Climate Change
12.	
Energy
13.	
Clustering
14.	
Export Markets
15.	
Tourism
16.	
Cost of Living
17.	
Cork Airport
18.	
Cork Harbour
19.	
Health
20.	
Family and Home Life	
21.	
Social Inclusion
22.	
Multiculturalism	
	
	
	
	
	
23.	
Social Activities	
	
24.	
Arts, Culture and Heritage
25.	
Security	
	
	
	
26.	
Regulatory Environment
27.	
Values		
	
	
28.	
Institutional Relationships
29.	
Data Co-Ordination
30.	
Reputation and Brand

44
 Local Economic And Community Plan
The followings section of this plan sets out a brief narrative around each asset and sets the context 
for the asset’s future protection and progression. Also identified are the key asset management 
goals and initial actions for each asset. 
It is appropriate that this LECP process allows for the goals and indicators identified to change as 
the process evolves over time. In fact, it is critical that change is facilitated, as required, to reflect 
the dynamic nature of social and economic planning. It is hoped that within the framework present­
ed herein, that each asset will be collectively shaped, managed, progressed and monitored by the 
relevant agencies and stakeholders.

45
Local Economic And Community Plan
1. HUMAN CAPITAL
The OECD describes human capital as ‘competencies and attributes embodied in individuals that 
facilitate the creation of personal, social and economic well-being.’(OECD, 2001). It is essentially the 
raw material of our society. The concept of human capital recognises that the quality of all of us 
who contribute to society can be improved by investing in us. The education, experience and abil­
ities of residents have an economic value for investors and the wider economy, as well as a social 
value for our communities and society as a whole.
The OECD has called skills the ‘new global currency of 21st century economies’ and many countries 
place a major focus on human capital development via investment in education and training, raising 
skill 
profiles, 
productivity 
and 
attractiveness 
to 
international 
investors. 
However, human capital development is not the sole preserve of our economic narrative. The cre­
ation and facilitation of residents who are engaged with society and motivated to improve our 
communities are a key asset that provide societal and economic benefits – social entrepreneurship 
being a case in point.
Human Capital is one of three key ingredients to delivering a successful economy with the other 
two ingredients being Financial Capital and Social Capital.
Human Capital: A Key Catalyst for a Successful Economy
HUMAN 
CAPITAL
People
Process
Structure
Learning
Knowledge
Organisation
Community
Culture
SOCIAL CAPITAL
Relationships
Cooperation
Networks
Reciprocity
Open Platforms
FINANCIAL 
CAPITAL
Assetss
Liabillities
Equity
Commerce
RETURN
ON
INVESTMENT

46
Importance of Human Capital
Human Capital plays a critical role in the delivery of socio-economic success and higher levels of 
continued education – in the widest sense of the word – is a key factor in forming human capital. 
People with better education tend to enjoy higher incomes, better health, higher levels of life 
satisfaction, etc. – resulting in attendant benefits to society, economically and socially. 
 
The Irish Government has recognised that human capital is the ‘single most important horizontal 
enabler of the National Research Priorities Exercise (NRPE)’.  The active participation of the Depart­
ment of Education and Skills, the Higher Education Authority and the Irish Research Centre has 
aligned a number of significant developments with the implementation of the NRPE. Published in 
2011, the National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030 is the roadmap for the future development 
of the higher education sector.  This fundamental reform recognises that If Ireland is to achieve its 
ambitions for recovery and development within an innovation-driven economy, it is essential to 
create and enhance human capital by expanding participation in higher education.
Of course, our ability to facilitate the full participation in society of all residents is a key element 
in the development of our human capital. This plan sets out a roadmap for how our young, eco­
nomically active population can be retained and a similar population cohort attracted to choose 
Cork as a place to live and work. However, we also recognise that it is economically and socially 
beneficial for us all to remove the socio-economic barriers that exist for some residents in fulfilling 
their own potential. As set out in the Social Inclusion section of this plan, we must strive to ensure 
equality of opportunity for all. 
Human Capital – Cultivated, Retained and Acquired
Policy makers acknowledge the critical role of a strong human resource base in complementing 
other investments and policies that seek to boost productivity and economic progress. The Irish 
Government seeks to ensure that citizens are equipped with the appropriate skills that are required 
to deliver a productive economy and a successful society. However, labour markets and societies 
are continually evolving and, hence, we are required to be flexible in how we develop our human 
capital and the relevant skill sets that underpin our economy and social evolution. 
The OECD states:
‘Skills development is more effective if the world of learning and the world of work are linked. 
Compared to purely government-designed curricula taught exclusively in schools, learning in the 
workplace offers several advantages: it allows young people to develop “hard” skills on modern 
equipment in a workplace, and “soft” skills, such as teamwork, communication and negotiation, 
through real-world experience.’
Of course this OECD narrative and sentiment can be extended to the realm of community also. Via 
the comprehensive LECP consultation process and the Quality of Life Survey, this plan process is 
reminded of the key societal characteristics that have been demonstrated by communities and 
continued to be highly valued, such as; resilience, engagement, connectedness, inclusivity, etc. The 
impacts of our education and public leadership processes have significant impacts on what form 
our human capital takes, and thereafter, what form our communities take. 

47
Local Economic And Community Plan
A central issue for policy makers is to link education and human capital development to labour 
market and societal needs. In doing so effectively, we will retain the talent we create, become more 
attractive to overseas talent, reinforce our attractiveness to investors and, critically, create the 
society that we want.
Population Growth
Ireland’s current population is predicted to grow from just over 4.5 million to between approx. 5.6 
million and 5.9 million - using mid-range scenario planning from CSO’s Population and Labour Force 
Projections 2016 – 2046.
Under the strongest scenario the population is projected to grow by 2.2 million to 6.7 million. Under 
the more moderate migration assumption the population is projected to be 5.6 million, while under 
the most negative scenario the population would not increase above 5 million. The difference in 
population between the highest and lowest outcomes by 2046 is 1.7 million.
            Current Population 4.5 million	
	
Projected 2046 Population 5.75 million
Historic Population Pattern
At the emergence of the 20th century, Cork and Dublin each consisted of approx. 400,000 population, 
while at the provincial level Munster and Leinster were each approx. 1.1 million population. At that 
time, the next largest county populations were of Mayo and Galway at just under 200,000, with 
Limerick at approx. 150,000. Provincially, Connaught and Ulster each has approx. 650,000 and 350,000 
population respectively. 
Today, the population of Dublin and its contiguous urban boundary stands in excess of 1 million, 
while the same figure for Cork is approx. 200,000. This divergence increases when comparing ‘urban 
Dublin’ (Dublin City and its contiguous urban area) and its hinterland (Greater Dublin Area) with 
‘urban Cork’ and its hinterland – approx. 1.6 million and approx. 500,000 respectively. (Hughes, B.: 
The Greater Dublin Area: Ireland's Potential City-State of the Early 21st Century. Doctoral Thesis. 
Dublin, Dublin Institute of Technology, 2010.)
Hence, in just over 100 years and starting from a similar population base, urban Dublin has out 
grown urban Cork by an approx. 8:1 ratio. In national terms, Dublin has emerged to dominate the 
state in terms of population and, hence, economically. 
Future Spatial Implications
The CSO’s Regional Population Projections for the period 2016-2031, states that it is likely that re­
gional population increases will largely occur in Dublin and the Mid-East (the GDA) – accounting for 
65% of projected total population growth. This is unsurprising, as population increases faster in 
locations adjoining larger urban areas.
The above growth prediction will result in all regions outside of Dublin and the Mid-East, albeit 
increasing actual population marginally, losing population share overall. It is clear that in the absence 
of an effective investment package to underpin an alternative to the above scenario, the national 

48
spatial impacts of population growth (Dublin focussed) will continue. 
National Spatial Policy
The former National Spatial Strategy (NSS) identified and acknowledged this spatial and economic 
imbalance, seeking as a key priority the creation of other places to be similarly strong (to the GDA) 
on a national and international scale. The National Planning Framework currently being conceived 
by Government will update the NSS within our current national socio-economic context. 
As discussed earlier in this document, population mass is known to be a critical stimulant for modern 
socio-economic growth. Larger population allows for local services to be actively supported, but 
perhaps more importantly it provides access to a larger employment population. This is a key 
consideration in supporting inward investment. 
Population growth can occur in two ways – through natural growth rates and in-migration. Natural 
growth rates for Cork have historically been undermined by out-migration. However, with a base 
Cork population in excess of 500,000, the Cork region has a sufficient platform now to support its 
transition to an international standard city-region.
Age Dependency Ratio
Age Dependency Ratio – often referred to as Dependency Ratio – simply indicates the ratio of 
economically active persons to those who are economically inactive. Dependency ratios indicate 
the potential effects of changes in population age structures for social and economic development, 
pointing out broad trends in social and economic needs.
Economically active persons will pay more taxes – income, corporate, sales and VAT, etc. – while the 
economically inactive group tend to be recipients of government spending – education, pensions, 
healthcare, etc. 
Hence, an increase in the Dependency Ratio can cause fiscal difficulties for governments and, by 
extension, can impact on the quality of life for residents. Countries where the economically active 
cohort significantly outweighs the economically inactive cohort feel the benefit of their combined 
socio-economic endeavours more than in countries where the opposite balance exists. Put simply, 
in an ageing scenario, more needs to be provided for with proportionally less to provide with.
 
Projected Dependency Ratio
While predicting Dependency Ratios involves a number of variables, the following OECD Demograph­
ic and Labour Force Graph explains the overall future trend. 

49
Local Economic And Community Plan
2000
2050
OECD-2000
OECD-2050
percentage of the 20 to 64 population.
Age-dependency ratio across a selection of OECD countries
(%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
S
l
o
v
a
k
i
a
N
e
w
 
Z
e
a
l
a
n
d
C
z
e
c
h
 
R
e
p
u
b
l
i
c
S
o
u
t
h
 
K
o
r
e
a
G
r
e
e
c
e
F
r
a
n
c
e
P
o
r
t
u
g
a
l
J
a
p
a
n
I
t
a
l
y
S
p
a
i
n
I
c
e
l
a
n
d
U
K
S
w
e
d
e
n
A
u
s
t
r
i
a
N
o
r
w
a
y
A
u
s
t
r
i
a
U
S
B
e
l
g
i
u
m
P
o
l
a
n
d
I
r
e
l
a
n
d
F
i
n
l
a
n
d
T
u
r
k
e
y
M
e
x
i
c
o
D
e
n
m
a
r
k
S
w
i
t
z
e
r
l
a
n
d
N
e
t
h
e
r
l
a
n
d
s
L
u
x
e
m
b
o
u
r
g
C
a
n
a
d
a
G
e
r
m
a
n
y
H
u
n
g
a
r
y
The CSO, under its M2F2 Scenario (Traditional), projects that Ireland’s Dependency Ratio will 
increase from 49% to 57% nationally by 2031, with 64% projected for Dublin - where under that 
scenario most population growth will continue to occur.
Projected Total Dependency Ratios, Ireland: CSO Regional Population Projections 2016-
2031
65
65
65
65
65
65
State
South East
Dublin

50
Implications of Changing Dependency Ratio:
By comparing the group of the population most likely to be economically active to the group most 
likely to be economically dependent, changes in the Dependency Ratio provides an indication of 
the potential future social support requirements required to maintain our levels of service provision. 
This in turn allows us to identify services that may become stressed by increased demand which, 
if not planned for, will have an adverse impact on our collective quality of life. These services include 
our healthcare, transport, education, etc. and are critical to our quality of life. 
 
Specifically in employment terms, Dependency Ratio has a critical role to play in terms of attracting 
private investment, as well as determining the type of employment we should be targeting. Firstly, 
within the modern, international economic system that we operate, a relatively young and well 
educated workforce is key in attracting inward private investment. Secondly, the ratio of econom­
ically active persons to economically inactive persons will play a significant role in determining the 
levels of social supports we can provide and, hence, our quality of life. Put simply, if we have a 
relatively reduced number of economically active persons in Cork, we need to offset this by a) in­
creasing proportionally our per capita income (to pay for social supports that we all require) and 
b) deliver our services more efficiently. 
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will ensure the development of human capital within 
Cork to meet the current and future socio-economic needs of the region
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, in conjunction with the Education Asset Management Group, to identify the key 
educational needs (in conjunction with the National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030) 
required to meet the projected future economic vision for the Cork region
Action 2
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to achieve the Government’s targets regarding 
entrepreneurship and start-ups, as set down in its 2014 National Entrepreneurship Policy 
Statement
Action 3
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to meet the personal development needs of Cork 
residents
Action 4
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to facilitate residents in extending their economic 
and social participation

51
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 5
In 2016, to engage with the National Planning Framework process, in order to advocate for 
the sustainable growth of the Cork regional population in excess of its growth rates over 
the past 20 years. 
Action 6
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to enable the Cork region to retain its youth 
population into adulthood
Action 7
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to enable the Cork region to attract former 
residents to return
Action 8
In 2016, develop a programme of actions to enable the Cork region to be attractive for in-
migration
Vision
Action 9
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Human Capital Index to monitor and measure 
the key socio-economic attributes of Cork residents

52
2. EMPLOYMENT & INCOME
Background
Our ability to create and sustain employment is crucial for the development of an advanced economy. 
Unemployment, and the corresponding lack of income, has significant social and economic costs, 
to both the unemployed and society as a whole.  Unemployment is a barrier to individuals, families, 
neighbourhoods and communities, while job creation brings real, tangible, direct and indirect so­
cio-economic benefits, not only for those employed but for wider society.
When discussing employment and income, an obvious starting point is to ask, why do we work? 
Responses to this question can be varied, but largely are grouped around the following themes;
▯
▯
Life and society depends on our willingness to work
▯
▯
Personal income and material needs 
▯
▯
Personal and social values
▯
▯
Personal satisfaction
While most employment analysis is based on the concept of income, deriving an income is not the 
sole reason we work – albeit the principle reason we do so. Hence, while this section seeks to focus 
primarily on the income derived from employment, it is important to acknowledge that in an ideal 
scenario we should strive to provide areas of work from which we derive satisfaction as well as 
income.
 
It is also important to note that our requirement to work is impacted upon by how efficiently we 
are collectively organised. For example, if our public services (healthcare, transport, education, 
housing, etc.) are delivered as efficiently as possible, our need to work is minimised and the ben­
efits are maximised.
Furthermore, as set out in the Human Capital section of this plan, the number of persons we have 
working (our workforce) are key determinants in the type of employment we need to attract and 
the level of per capita income we require to maintain a relatively high overall standard of living. 
The EU, through its Europe 2020 Strategy is striving for full employment economies.  In Ireland this 
is being delivered through targets set out in the National Reform Programme on education, em­
ployment and social inclusion.  
The headline employment target in the National Reform Programme 2015 is as follows:
To raise to 69-71% the employment rate for women and men aged 20-64, including through the 
greater participation of young people, older workers and low-skilled workers, and the better inte­
gration of legal migrants.

53
Local Economic And Community Plan
Progress is being made toward this target.   The employment rate for women and men aged 20-64 
was 67% in 2014, up by more than 3% since 2012, showing a continuing improvement in the labour 
market after a fall from 74% in 2007. 
 
In Cork, the unemployment rate is approx. 10%, which is significantly lower than the national average. 
Furthermore, this figure is a significant reduction on the 14% unemployment rate recorded in 2014. 
South West Action Plan for Jobs 2015 - 2017
The regional Action Plan for Jobs (APJ) gives effect to themes and actions that will underpin the 
restructuring of the regional economy from an over-reliance on credit financed domestic consump­
tion and residential property construction, to a more sustainable economic model. There are almost 
300 actions in this plan across all sectors, involving all Government Departments and approx. 50 
delivery agencies.
This is a comprehensive and detailed plan that addresses the needs of all relevant employment 
sectors within the region. It additionally identifies actions around cross-cutting and enabling 
measures that will support future employment growth.
There is significant overlap between the APJ and the LECP and, hence, this LECP does not seek to 
reproduce the detailed work undertaken by the APJ. Rather, this plan seeks to facilitate the imple­
mentation of the APJ via complementary actions and a complementary process.
The APJ sets out detailed actions regarding:
▯
▯
Agri-food and Drink sector
▯
▯
Tourism
▯
▯
Global Business Services
▯
▯
Construction
▯
▯
Engineering and Manufacturing
▯
▯
Retail
▯
▯
Lifesciences
▯
▯
ICT sector
▯
▯
Multimedia, Culture, Content and Design
▯
▯
Energy, Green Economy and Marine
▯
▯
New Sources of Growth and Demonstrating Solutions to Grand Challenges
In addition, the APJ sets out additional detailed actions regarding enabling measures, including:
▯
▯
Branding and Marketing the South West Region
▯
▯
Driving Entrepreneurship
▯
▯
Building Enterprise Capability and Connections
▯
▯
Fostering Innovation

54
▯
▯
Attracting and Embedding Foreign Direct Investment
▯
▯
Social and Community Enterprise
▯
▯
Enhancing Skills and labour Market Activation
▯
▯
Enhancing the Business Environment
▯
▯
Key Infrastructure Requirements to Support Enterprise
 
As a detailed employment plan of action for the region, the APJ sets out the next steps in the 
progressing of the above employment sectors – providing focus for the future endeavours of  eco­
nomic and employment-related delivery agencies. Those endeavours will ultimately result in the 
removal of many of the barriers that exist to employment growth, as well as stimulating employment 
opportunities.
While this LECP seeks to support all of the actions as set out in the APJ, it also extracts a small 
number of sectors identified by the APJ that have a locational or overarching importance for Cork.
 These include:
▯
▯
Human Capital – reflecting importance of developing workforce and communities
▯
▯
Tourism - reflecting benefits of enlarging our economic market, as well as the role that tour­
ism plays in sustaining Cork’s rural economy
▯
▯
Exports – again reflecting benefits of enlarging our economic market, as well as the growing 
role that exports can play in sustaining Cork’s overall economy
▯
▯
Energy – reflecting not just the employment growth potential of this sector, but also the criti­
cal role that sustainable energy plays in underpinning our society
 
A number of other themes identified in the APJ, such as, infrastructure, Cork International Airport, 
Cork harbour, connectivity, etc. are also included in this LECP as distinct assets.
Cork Economy & Labour Market
The economy of County Cork is broadly based and diverse in its makeup, reflecting its geography 
and its diverse employment asset base. This diversity of employment is as a direct result of signif­
icant collaborative efforts of key stakeholders and delivery agencies within the Cork region over 
the past two decades. 
In recent decades, changes in the global market have seen the general manufacturing activities 
established in the mid 20th century decline, whilst increased access to European and world markets 
has stimulated the development of the agriculture, marine and food production sectors.  However, 
there has also been significant investment in modern technology based manufacturing in sectors 
such as electronics, pharmaceuticals and medical devices. The service sector has also grown sig­
nificantly as modern Information Communications Technologies developments have enabled Cork 
to serve global markets.
Cork’s employment base continues to grow and diversify, underpinning our future economic sustainability. 
The APJ, supported by this LECP process, gives direction to our future collective employment endeavours.

55
Local Economic And Community Plan
Modern Employment Needs
If Cork is to continue to grow its economy, it is critical that we create suitable supporting infrastruc­
ture at appropriate locations to support employment growth. Our employment sectors have signif­
icant growth potential, particularly within the agriculture/fisheries/food, office based industry, 
technology, innovation, education and tourism sectors – all aimed in particular at the export / 
foreign investment markets.
 
Cork, located at the edge of Europe, outside of the continental landmass, and with a limited do­
mestic market, needs to protect and enhance its economic relevance within an international context. 
By removing barriers to Cork exporters, by creating real estate and other infrastructure that will 
attract foreign investment, by facilitating a creative operational environment that will stimulate 
entrepreneurship and innovation, by aligning education provision with our critical needs, and, by 
attracting tourism, we will continue to facilitate the provision of employment opportunities.
The removal of barriers to allow for our economic ambitions to be realised will entail a wide range 

56
of specific actions. Those actions are outlined in the regional Action Plan for Jobs. However, further 
policy and regulatory shifts will be required across a number of other sectors to accommodate our 
future needs, such as; development of modern urban offices, public transport orientated employment 
locations, enhanced transport network, enhanced conduits for foreign market exports, increased 
agency interaction within innovation sector, etc. 
Income
Gross incomes are important, however, they must be set within a disposable income context – re­
flecting the relationship between overall income and cost of living. While per capita income in Cork 
is below, not unexpectedly, that of Dublin, it is telling that only Dublin, Kildare, Limerick and Cork 
have per capita disposable incomes that exceed the state average.
 
Employment Focus
Underpinning the above narrative is the fact that, as a society, we are ageing. As set out in the 
Human Capital section of this plan, a proportional reduction in our economically active population 
cohort will put a strain on our ability to maintain our disposable income and standards of living. To 
this end, it is critical that we achieve three key aims:
1.	Retain our young population as part of our economically active population cohort
2.	Attract in-migration to Cork of economically active persons
3.	Target employment that will increase our overall per-capita income
Cork certainly has the existing asset base to provide an attractive economic and social package 
within Cork to existing residents, future residents, and potential investors. If we collectively organ­
ise ourselves around those assets, sharing a common purpose, we will facilitate the sustainable 
growth that is required to sustain our living standards.  
Asset Management Goal
To maximise employment and income levels within the Cork region by supporting the 
programme of actions set out in the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017.
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, develop a programme of employment related actions to increase the attraction of 
the Cork region in retaining its recently emerged and emerging workforce
Action 2
In 2017, develop a programme of employment related actions to increase the attraction for 
in-migration to the Cork region of economically active persons
Action 3 >Continued Overleaf

57
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 5
By 2018, to advise and assist the Urban Cork and Rural Cork Asset Management Groups 
in their completion of an audit of existing employment premises / facilities and in their 
development of a system of on-going monitoring
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, to advise the Physical Infrastructure Asset Management 
Group as to the protection and enhancement of Cork’s key employment related 
infrastructure assets  
Action 7
By 2017, in collaboration with the Urban Cork and Rural Cork Asset Management Groups, to 
develop a programme of actions to ensure the provision of a suitable choice of employment 
premises choice, by location, type and cost
Vision
Action 8
In 2016, to develop a programme of priority actions for Cork arising from the South West 
Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017.
Action 9
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to increase the per capita income for the Cork 
region 
Action 10
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Employment Index to monitor and measure 
the key employment attributes of the Cork region
In 2017, develop a programme of actions to facilitate employees who desire to extend their 
employment participationns
Action 4
In 2017, to advise the Human Capital and Education Asset Management Groups in their 
identification of the key educational and skills needs required to meet the future economic 
and employment vision for the Cork region, as well as developing a programme of actions 
to facilitate collaboration between educational institutions and industry in the delivery of 
strategic programmes and research at third level. 

58
3. URBAN CORK
Urbanisation
In 2008, for the first time, more than half the world’s population are living in urban areas. This global 
trend has been influenced greatly by the expansion of the world’s largest cities, as the number of 
mega-cities (more than 10 million inhabitants) and meta-cities (more than 20 million inhabitants) 
continues to increase.
However, it is also of note that smaller cities are playing a far more significant role in facilitating 
this process. More than 50% of the global urban population live in cities with less than 500,000 
inhabitants and 20% of the global urban population live in urban areas of between one million and 
five million inhabitants. These smaller cities, cities that share greater similarities with Irish cities, 
are predicted to grow at a faster rate than the larger conurbations for the foreseeable future.
This urbanisation trend is also occurring in Ireland, with between 60% and 70% of Irish residents 
now residing within urban areas. That urbanisation is occurring in Ireland as well as international­
ly is not surprising, as the primary driver of this trend is the global economy. Economic growth 
generally, for a variety of reasons, favours urbanisation and reflects the specialisation that under­
pins modern economics. The section on Cork Cluster within this plan reflects on the important role 
of that clusters play for our industries, and urban areas play a key role in this regard also – as 
significant social and economic clusters that drive innovation and change.  
In addition, urban areas tend to provide more choice to residents and, hence, are often socially (as 
well as economically) attractive. Therefore, urbanisation is set to continue within Ireland.
Urban / Rural
However, how urban is defined is critical at this juncture - as not all urban dwellers live in our cities, 
but often live within a certain travel range outside of our cities. It is of note that between 2002 and 
2006, the population within Irish city council boundaries increased at a significantly lower rate than 
for other areas. Furthermore, local authority areas closest to cities have experienced the highest 
population growth rates, for example; Fingal – 20%, Meath - 21 %, Cork County and Galway County 
– approx. 11% each. 
Therefore, urban and rural areas cannot be described in simply spatial terms, but must also be 
described in socio-economic terms.  We have choices to make that will determine the form that our 
future urbanisation will take and urbanisation should not be considered incompatible with the 
sustaining of rural areas within an Irish context (see also section on Rural Cork). As stated above, 
how we define urban is critical. Urban, in its general usage, refers to persons living and working 
within urban masses (cities and large towns), however, the reality is more complex. 
The Cork Area Strategic Plan (CASP) reflected the above narrative, focussing on Cork City and Met­

59
Local Economic And Community Plan
ropolitan Cork – but also the population that lives within 45 min / 1 hr travel distance of Cork city 
centre, considered collectively as a single market for jobs and housing. This catchment, described 
as Cork Ring, reflects the reality of the social and economic choices that people make. We all engage 
with life – economic and social – in varying ways and construct lives that reflect our own values 
and priorities. 
Therefore, to be considered an important active participant in Urban Cork does not require a person 
to reside within Cork’s central urban mass, but rather to have relatively strong social and econom­
ic links with the urban core.  How we organise these links, in spatial terms, will influence greatly 
how successful our social and economic development will be. 
Future Cork
If Cork is to achieve a population level that will allow it to continue to be economically relevant, as 
well as to play an important national role in facilitating the projected national population growth 
up to 2046, our socio-economic and spatial planning must inform how Cork’s future overall popu­
lation will organise itself. This is key to our future collective success – locally, regionally and na­
tionally.
While this LECP process seeks to remove barriers to persons achieving their social and economic 
ambitions within Cork, an unstructured approach to this expansion would certainly lead to ineffi­
ciencies and a reduction in our overall quality of life. A future strategic spatial plan to give econom­
ic, social, environmental and spatial direction to our future growth is critical – similar to the impor­
tant and successful regional role that CASP fulfilled. 
A growing Cork, underpinned by a collective spatial, economic and social vision, offers the following 
opportunities:
▯
▯
Driver for regional inward investment
▯
▯
Facilitates branding and promotion
▯
▯
Offers choice to residents as to how they live
▯
▯
Achieves regional critical mass
Within this context, transport and density of development require particular mention.
Transport and Density
While the provision of a range of social, economic and environmental infrastructure is vital to un­
derpin planned for expansion, the provision of a transport network within Metropolitan Cork is 
critical - and with linkages into Cork Ring and its rural hinterland. Public transport in particular, if 
organised efficiently, has the potential to shrink travel times, increase cost competitiveness, enhance 
socio-economic choice to residents, allow for all residents to participate economically and deliver 
significant environmental savings. 
Increased densities (residential and commercial) – but at appropriate locations where density related 
trade-offs are practical - will assist in the delivery of returns on public transport investment. In 

60
particular, significant increases in commercial / office property densities and the replacement of 
the no longer suitable commercial / office premises within the urban core area is key to facilitating 
a planned expansion strategy to support the city centre.  To complement this, by providing dedi­
cated public transport corridors between Cork’s urban core and those surrounding locations deemed 
appropriate for expansion, a range of densities can be facilitated that will provide important con­
sumer choice. 
The above narrative is predicated on the National Planning Framework identifying a role for the 
Cork region that envisages a significant population increase up to 2050, reflecting the goals of the 
former National Spatial Strategy (that sought to create viable alternative growth locations to the 
Greater Dublin Area). A transport-orientated planned expansion and centred on a modernised 
commercial urban core will give effect to any such strategy. 
Asset Management Goal
To promote Urban Cork as the key economic regional driver and to protect it from 
developing inefficiently, in order to retain its economic competitiveness.
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing residential stock and to develop a system of on-
going monitoring
Action 2
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing employment premises / facilities and to develop a 
system of on-going monitoring
Action 3
By 2017, in collaboration with the Housing Asset Management Group and the Rural Cork 
Asset Management Group, to develop a programme of actions to ensure the provision of 
housing choice to residents, by location, type and cost
Action 4
By 2017, in collaboration with the Employment / Income Assets Management Group and 
the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, to develop a programme of actions to ensure the 
provision of a suitable choice of employment premises choice, by location, type and cost 
Place
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to continue to advocate for, and facilitate, regional 
collaboration by local authorities, key stakeholders and delivery agencies 
Action 6
On adoption of the planned for National Planning Framework >Continued Overleaf           

61
Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 7
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard to the targets for Cork as set out in the 
future National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, and in 
conjunction with the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, Cork City Council and other key 
stakeholders, develop a sustainable spatial and transportation plan with the requirements 
of the SEA, Birds and Habitats Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with 
the programmes of infrastructure delivery agencies. The outputs of this spatial and 
transportation plan for the Cork region will be consistent with the future NPF and RSES
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Urban Cork Index to monitor and measure the 
key socio-economic performance of Urban Cork
and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the Rural Cork Asset 
Management Group, Cork City Council and other key stakeholders, develop a sustainable 
Cork spatial vision that will give effect to population growth targets set for Cork whilst 
ensuring the protection of natural environmental resources. This spatial vision for the Cork 
region will be consistent with the future NPF and RSES

62
4. RURAL CORK
Urbanisation
Globally, over 50 percent of the world’s population reside in cities and within Europe over 70 percent 
are urban dwellers. This urbanisation is also occurring in Ireland, with between 60% and 70% of 
Irish residents now residing within urban areas – depending on how urban and rural are defined. 
This urbanisation – as discussed in more detail under Urban Cork herein – is set to continue for 
reasons largely connected to our modern economic system and personal choices.
However, urbanisation impacts on rural areas in varying ways. Some rural areas, particularly those 
within commuting distance of urban Cork, have experienced population increases while many other 
areas have seen continued decline.  There is a clear relationship – in Cork, nationally and interna­
tionally – between population trends and proximity to urban centres.
 
Population Shift
As stated under the Human Capital section of this plan, over 100 years ago Cork and Dublin each 
consisted of approx. 400,000 population, while at the provincial level Munster and Leinster were 
each approx. 1.1 million population. Today, the population of Dublin and its contiguous urban 
boundary stands in excess of 1 million, while the same figure for Cork is approx. 200,000. This di­
vergence increases when comparing ‘urban Dublin’ (Dublin City and its contiguous urban area) and 
its hinterland (Greater Dublin Area) with ‘urban Cork’ and its hinterland (referred to as Cork Ring) 
– approx. 1.6 million and approx. 400,000 respectively.
Hence, the primary shift in population within Ireland over the past century has been toward Dublin 
and the Greater Dublin Area. That process, coupled with significant net emigration, has dominated 
the Irish population narrative. Rural population losses within Cork are not offset by a similar increase 
in urban dwellers within Cork city and its contiguous urban hinterland, as Cork’s overall population 
has only increased by approx. 100,000 over the past century, most of which has occurred within the 
past 20 years. Allowing for a number of variables within a normal population growth rate range, it 
is reasonable to conclude that Cork’s overall population would be approx. 50% higher if net out-mi­
gration was not occurring.
Urban and Rural 
In spatial, as well as socio-economic terms, urbanisation does not necessarily result in rural de­
population and general decline. In fact, in most jurisdictions, urbanisation has supported the reju­
venation of large rural areas. However, these positive impacts vary depending on the proximity and, 
critically, the efficiency of connectedness between the rural area and the urban centre. In most 
cases, those rural areas within a one hour travel distance of the urban centre have benefitted most 
from increased urban population. This effect can be clearly seen in Ireland within the historically 
rural counties close to Dublin, where significant growth has occurred in the most recent decades. 

63
Local Economic And Community Plan
As also set out in the Urban Cork section, rural local authority areas closest to Dublin have expe­
rienced high population growth rates, for example, Fingal, Meath, Kildare and Wicklow. 
Hence, urbanisation offers surrounding rural communities increased choice and makes investment 
into those surrounding rural areas more viable. This plan has acknoweldged the long-term histor­
ical trend within Cork, where we have struggled to retain our overall natural population growth. 
This has created a significant barrier for Cork in general and for rural Cork in particular. If Cork can 
achieve the retention of its future population growth and attract inward migration also (supported 
by national policy) over the coming decades, we will provide the critical foundation for a sustaina­
ble urban and rural Cork. 
Connectivity
Critical to this vision however, is strategic planning and strategic investment in how we connect to 
our urban core. Unplanned for growth will always result in physical, social, environmental and 
economic inefficiencies. However, planned for growth can be accurately described as expansion 
that can bring increased efficiencies due to critical mass. 
The Cork County Development Plan sets out a vision of a hierarchy of settlements, from central 
urban to rural village, with potential to plug into a public transportation network – as yet an unre­
alised network. This planned for interconnected hierarchy has the potential to offer real choice to 
residents as to how they wish to construct their social and economic lives.
This settlement hierarchy and its supporting transportation network are, however, critically linked 
to our future population. Within a future Cork population of up to one million, public transport 
investment becomes more realistic and will facilitate socio-economic choice – a critical tool in 
attracting people and investment. Hence, a Cork that has a long-term strategic vision could be a 
place where residents can choose a traditional urban lifestyle, a traditional rural lifestyle or a 
contemporary urban/rural life – without the social, economic and environmental inefficiencies that 
affect other locations. 
Peripheral Rural Areas
The above narrative focuses very much on urban / rural hinterland relationship. However, due to 
the geographic scale of Cork, approx. 100,000 residents live outside the 45mn/1hr travel distance 
zone. Furthermore, many communities are located within isolated coastal and islands areas. For 
these residents, their socio-economic relationship with urban Cork is less pronounced. However, 
that it not to suggest that these communities are less relevant within the modern socio-economic 
conversation. 
In the first instance, these areas play an important economic role within Cork, and nationally, as 
centres of significant industry based on natural resources. Fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc. are 
critical sectors of our economy, the importance of which will only grow. However, with the exception 
of tourism, these industries require less employee densities than previously. Therefore, within the 
economic future of these areas is a need to diversify their economic base, and, actions within this 
sphere are critical to the future viability of those areas (see also Employment section herein).
A larger Cork, in population terms, will support economic diversification within rural Cork. Planned 

64
expansion of Cork into its hinterland will bring a larger population closer to those peripheral com­
munities and will, inevitably, allow for increased interactions (social and economic). In addition, 
targeted actions to grow exports (in particular, food related products) and imports (tourism) will 
be underpinned by a stronger urban Cork – where port, road, rail and air transport facilities can be 
expanded (see Connectivity, Cork Airport and Cork Harbour sections of this plan). 
However, within this anticipated growth of Cork there remains the need to sustain rural communi­
ties as important participants in our regional future. If future overall regional growth will assist the 
sustainability of our rural areas, we must seek to protect our diverse rural communities in the 
immediate timeframe from further decline.
It is advocated in this plan that a combination of improved connectivity (transport and telecommu­
nications) coupled with economic diversification will assist in protecting our rural communities in 
the short term. The provision of broadband connectivity (a significant issue raised during public 
consultations) will also be more feasible and affordable for all areas, within a significantly larger 
Cork. This connectivity will play a crucial role in rural economic diversification. 
Urban and rural areas cannot be described in simply spatial terms, but must also be described in 
socio-economic terms.  There is a clear and critical relationship between our traditional urban core 
and our traditional rural areas, and a stronger urban Cork will make for stronger rural areas within 
the county. 
While we have choices to make that will determine the form that our future urbanisation will take, 
urbanisation should not be considered incompatible with the sustaining of rural areas within a Cork 
context. Our rural areas are a significant asset and a critical part of the suite of lifestyles that Cork 
can offer its residents.
Targeted interventions for rural area are important in this regard. For example, the REDZ (Rural 
Economic development Zones) initiative sought to develop and deliver a diverse range of projects 
with economic development objectives, aimed at enhancing the socio-economic vibrancy. 
Asset Management Goal
To promote Rural Cork as a key environmental, economic and social asset, to reverse 
depopulation where it continues to occur and to efficiently and sustainably  manage 
growing rural area 
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing residential stock and to develop a system of on-
going monitoring
Action 2
By 2017, to complete an audit of existing employment premises / facilities and to develop a 
system of on-going monitoring

65
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to continue to advocate for, and facilitate, regional 
collaboration by local authorities, key stakeholders and delivery agencies 
Action 6
On adoption of the planned for National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the Urban Cork Asset Management Group, 
develop a sustainable Cork spatial vision that will give effect to the population growth 
targets set for Cork whilst ensuring the protection of natural environmental resources
Vision
Action 7
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard to the targets for Cork as set out in the 
future National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, and in 
conjunction with the Urban Cork Asset Management Group, develop a sustainable spatial 
and transportation plan compatible with the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats 
Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with the programmes of infrastructure 
delivery agencies. The outputs of this spatial and transportation plan for the Cork region 
will be consistent with the future NPF and RSES
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Rural Cork Index to monitor and measure the 
key socio-economic performance of Rural Cork
Action 3
By 2017, in collaboration with the Housing Assets Management Group and the Urban Cork 
Asset Management Group, to develop a programme of actions to ensure the provision of 
housing choice to residents, by location, type and type and cost 
Action 4
By 2018, collaboration with the Employment / Income Assets Management Group and the 
Urban Cork Asset Management Group, to develop a programme of actions to ensure the 
provision of a suitable choice of employment premises choice, by location, type and cost

66
5. CONNECTIVITY
Places that allow for the convenient and efficient movement of people, materials, goods and infor­
mation form the centres of production where wealth is created. Our level of future connectedness 
– for people, goods and information – will play a critical role in our ability to grow Cork socially and
economically. 
Transportation brings goods and people together, and where commerce and culture are exchanged 
inevitably more people are drawn. Information sharing brings ideas together, stimulating innovations 
(see also Clustering section herein). Human settlements first clustered around seaports and wa­
terways, while modern urban development typically revolves around useful transportation corridors, 
such as, roads and public transport systems.
Reflecting the importance of connectivity – physical and information - the Government last year 
established the Connectivity Fund. This fund will operate on a commercial basis, providing support 
for commercial investment projects with a connectivity theme, such as the development of ports 
and airports, but  also open to providing support for projects that involve a wider definition of 
connectivity, including for example, data connectivity.
The way people use general transportation systems (physical and communications) informs the 
shape of our spatial development. In modern history, road transportation systems have dominated 
the spatial cycle allowing for the separation of employment, retail and housing areas. This separa­
tion, linked directly to the widespread use of private motor vehicles, has increased choice but has 
also increased the distances that residents travel on a regular basis. Such movement patterns have 
led to economic inefficiency, degradation of the natural environment and reduction in overall quality 
of life.  Regarding telecommunications, those places with the highest levels of connectivity are the 
first to be explored for investment within our modern economy.
This plan seeks to build upon the established spatial development pattern of the Cork region, de­
veloped in recent years under the Cork Area Strategic Plan (CASP). This plan also seeks to provide 
a potential vision for the region that will facilitate its transition to a region of up to one million 
population, facilitating growth generally, but also facilitating stability to those areas that have been 
affected by socio-economic decline. Our connectivity is at the heart of achieving this.
International
The sections of this plan under Cork Airport and Cork Harbour discuss in greater detail the critical 
roles that our airport and harbour play in the socio-economic performance of our region. As an 
island nation with a relatively small indigenous population, our ability to move people and goods 
in and out of our country is vital. Within Cork’s future vision as an attractive place to live and work, 
our international connectivity will be critical. 
In modern economies, separation distances between places are less important than travel times. 
For example, travel times from Cork to Dublin and Cork to London are similar and – as discussed 

67
Local Economic And Community Plan
earlier in this plan – by reducing those travel times further we can ‘move’ Cork closer to these 
centres of commerce and increase the beneficial effects of our inter-relatedness.
  
International telecommunication connectivity is also critical, with much progress having been made 
in recent years in this regard. Critically, Tier 1 fibre connectivity from Cork to the UK and US has 
recently been announced and will underpin our future international telecommunications connec­
tivity.
  
National
Cork’s primary national linkage is with Dublin, via the M8 motorway and the inter-urban rail route 
(where almost three million passenger trips were made in 2015). Improvement in both services, 
particularly the development of the M8, has reduced travel times to approx two and a half hours. 
There are currently no scheduled air services between Cork and the country’s other main urban 
centres. 
If Cork, as the second largest urban centre in Ireland and with a considerable existing asset base, 
is to fulfil its potential as a counterbalance to Dublin’s continued spatial expansion, national con­
nectivity will play a central role in achieving this. Further reductions in travel times between Cork 
and Dublin will make Cork an even more attractive proposition to inward investment – both for new 
ventures or for the expansion of existing companies. It is difficult to see how travel times on our 
primary inter-urban road route (M8) can be reduced further and, hence, air and rail would appear 
to be where improvements can be achieved in the medium to long term. To this end, Iarnroid Eireann 
has recently announced service investment that will reduce travel times further to 2hr 15m, while 
Cork Airport Authority has been extremely active in seeking the development of a cost and time 
effective service to Dublin. 
 
Regional
As has been the case for Dublin and the Greater Dublin Area, a larger Urban Cork (see also Urban 
Cork section herein) can provide the stimulus for an economically stronger region (including Cork’s 
county towns and extending ultimately to Waterford and Limerick). Existing and planned for region­
al road network improvements will reduce future travel times within the region, creating more 
economic opportunities therein. However, the optimum, long term, strategic regional vision would 
be appropriately based on public transport enhancements - and in particular the creation of a 
co-ordinated rail and bus network.
Existing rail connections from Cork City to Mallow, Cobh and Midleton offer real transport choice to 
travellers – and commuters in particular. Usage of all three services is increasing, with Midleton and 
Cobh recording passenger numbers in 2015 of 312,000 and 745,000. High quality transport linkages 
with Urban Cork will allow regional town, and rural areas generally, to benefit from future regional 
economic uplift. 
In terms of telecommunications connectivity, the absence of broadband is a significant socio-eco­
nomic barrier for rural areas. Implementation of the Government’s National Broadband Plan is 
critical for households, businesses, farming, health, tourism, education and public services gener­
ally in those areas currently without reliable, usable connections. These journey time improvements, 
coupled with important ongoing measures to minimise trip demand to safeguard capacity on all 
National Roads, provide Cork with a high standard of road connectivity with Dublin.

68
Local
The most critical piece of the connectivity hierarchy – particularly for transport – is the local trans­
port network. This is the network that all international, national and regional connections plug into 
and, hence, if the local network is inefficient it will impact negatively on all other services. 
The Cork Area Strategic Plan set out a transportation based growth plan for the Cork region, laying 
the foundation for the growth and expansion of Cork. It was the CASP vision that led ultimately to 
the re-opening of the Cork-Midleton rail line. A number of public transport service improvements 
have also occurred within the Metropolitan Cork area, including the expansion creation of addition­
al bus routes. 
Ultimately, Metropolitan Cork will require a public transport network. A network provides users with 
the opportunity to construct their own routes in a time and cost efficient manner, and its creation 
requires the continued collaboration of all key stakeholders – government agencies, transport bodies 
and local authorities.
 
Of course, public transport usage and population size are directly linked. Hence, by identifying a 
long term population growth target for Cork via the NPF and the RSES, all Cork stakeholders will be 
able to form a strategic growth plan for Cork that will facilitate public transport orientated devel­
opment. Continued co-operation between the two local authorities in Cork and the National Trans­
port Authority is key to meeting the existing and future public transport needs of Cork. Significant 
planning and service re-organisation in the area of public transport has produced service improve­
ments to meet demand, with future co-ordination building on same. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance Cork’s physical and technological 
connectivity and to develop sustainable and flexible connectivity options that
can adapt to the changing needs of business and the community - locally, regionally, 
nationally and internationally in a manner that is compatible with protection and 
sustainable management of our natural resources.  
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan, advocate for and support the roll out to all areas of County 
Cork the broadband connectivity planned for within the Government’s National Broadband 
Plan
Action 2
By 2019, to complete an audit of all existing telecommunications infrastructure within the 
Cork region and to develop a system of on-going monitoring
Action 3
By 2019, to complete an audit of all existing transport infrastructure within the Cork region 
and to develop a system of on-going monitoring
Action 4 
By 2019, to develop a programme of actions that will facilitate >Continued Overleaf 

69
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 6
By 2018, to develop a sustainable regional transport plan for Cork County and a programme 
of actions toward the creation of a regional transport network that
a)will provide real choice to residents as to how they travel and how they construct their 
journeys within Cork;
b)	
that facilitates the efficient interaction of Cork County, Cork Ring and Metropolitan 
Cork transport assets;
c)	
that facilitates the efficient interaction of road, bus, rail, air and marine transport 
infrastructure; and 
d)	
that accommodates industry needs regarding the movement of materials, goods 
and people.  The plan and programme of actions will be prepared in a manner which is 
compatible with the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats Directives. 
This transport plan should be developed in conjunction with the Southern Regional 
Assembly and Cork City Council.
Action 7
On adoption of the planned for National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, 
develop a sustainable Cork spatial vision that will give effect to population growth targets 
set for Cork whilst ensuring the protection of natural environmental resources. 
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard to and compatible with the targets for Cork 
as set out in the future National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic 
Strategy, and in conjunction with the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, develop a 
sustainable spatial and transportation plan compatible with the requirements of the SEA, 
Birds and Habitats Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with the programmes 
of infrastructure delivery agencies.
increased usage of public transport, walking and cycling by all residents within the Cork 
region, as well as actions to reduce trip demand
Action 5
By 2019, to develop a targeted transport strategy (strategic vision) that will identify medium 
to long term actions to reduce travel times between Cork and Dublin and between Cork and 
London , as well as with identified regional Gateways and Hubs (e.g. Limerick, Waterford, 
Mallow, and Tralee-Killarney).
Vision
Action 9
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of usage of and satisfaction 
with public transport as reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each 
Municipal District
Action 10
Within the lifetime of this plan develop a Cork Connectivity Index that will identify, measure 
and monitor the local, regional, national and international connectivity of Cork

70
6. COMMUNITY
Community is usually described as group of people in a given geographical location, but commu­
nity can refer to any group sharing something in common. We are all part of multiple communities, 
variously defined by location, shared interest, etc., while in Cork we have unique communities such 
as our Islands and our Gaeltacht communities.
Communities are at the heart of our society. They are the places where we live and often work, 
where our families are, where our friends are, and where we largely interact with life. From the Cork 
Quality of Life Survey, 89% of residents value their communities and a similar percentage feel that 
they live in good communities. Furthermore, four out of five residents are involved with organised 
social activities, normally within their own communities.
 
A positive and productive community environment can have a significant beneficial impact on its 
membership and the opposite also holds true. We are attracted – to live and work – within positive 
environments that reflect our own values and ambitions. The family and community environments 
from which we emerge are significant determinants in the development of our human capital (see 
Human Capital section herein).
 
However, barriers can exist within communities that frustrate those values or impede those ambi­
tions. Where such circumstances exist, we collectively attempt to intervene and create the circum­
stances where those barriers can be removed. 
Community Organisations and Civic Engagement
Community organisations can be described in various ways and include varying sectors. However, 
they can be generally grouped as organisations that provide supports and services on a voluntary 
basis to the betterment of society.  Involvement in community groups and other organisations 
enhances a resident’s sense of belonging and such belonging is fundamental to our sense of hap­
piness and well-being. These community organisations have been supported by the work of Local 
Development Companies and Local Authorities, aiding their empowerment at local, national and 
European levels. 
  
Civic engagement refers to the ways in which citizens participate in the life of a community in order 
to improve conditions for others or to help shape the community's future. 
 
According to the OECD Better Life Index 2013 concerning the public sphere, there exists a strong 
sense of community and moderate levels of civic participation in Ireland.  Voter turnout, a measure 
of public trust in government and of citizens’ participation in the political process, was 70% during 
recent elections, below the OECD average of 72%.  However, Ireland scored second highest in the 
OECD for citizens volunteering time, giving money and helping a stranger. The OECD estimates that 
community volunteerism in Ireland equates in financial terms to 2% of our national GDP.

71
Local Economic And Community Plan
It is estimated that approximately two-thirds of Irish adults engage every year in contributing to 
and supporting the voluntary sector. In addition, this sector is a significant employer nationally.  As 
Ireland’s diversity increases, community and voluntary organisations will have an even more sig­
nificant role to play into the future. 
Principles for Effective Community/Civic Engagement include:
▯
▯
Empower residents through meaningful inclusion and partnerships 
▯
▯
Build capacity of communities to engage
▯
▯
Prioritize community knowledge and concerns 
▯
▯
Target resources to support ongoing engagement 
▯
▯
Facilitate mechanisms that encourage mutual learning 
Self Determination
Community work is concerned with the development and empowerment of communities through 
facilitating the active participation of people in addressing issues that affect them collectively. It 
can be done in a variety of contexts: in neighbourhoods, with specific groups, with partnership 
groups, local authorities and state agencies. 
The multiplicity of agencies involved in assisting communities is both a reflection of the complex­
ity of those communities and the wide spectrum of issues that affect them.  The Cork Quality of 
Life Survey results indicate that while overall Cork County is performing well and that communities 
are reasonably vigorous, some variances occur. Not every community is challenged in the same way 
and not every community is coping with those challenges. 
Cork 
The recent Local Government Reform Act 2014 has commenced the restructuring of all Community 
& Voluntary Forums nationally.  The previous Directory of Community and Voluntary Groups in County 
Cork (Cork County Council) is no longer in operation but initially comprised of approximately 1400 
registered member organisations.  It is being replaced by the Public Participation Network (PPN). 
This PPN will be a primary link through which local government continue to connect and engage 
with the community. 
 
However, local government is not the only actor in the community sphere, with much good work 
being undertaken by local development companies and government agencies. The process that this 
plan advocates, seeks to bring together all key community stakeholders and agencies to collective­
ly remove barriers to community ambition. 
The post-LECP structures seek to create a pathway for community voices to be heard and for the 
work of various agencies to be aligned. In particular, the newly established Local Community De­
velopment Committees (North, South and West) will have an oversight and coordinating role in di­
recting of initiatives at the local level – reflecting the different barriers that exist in various locations 
around the county. 

72
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will remove socio-economic barriers and enhance the 
sustainability of all communities within Cork
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, to complete a geographical audit of all communities, set out by both activity 
and Municipal District This audit should identify barriers (facilities, operational, etc.) 
experienced by those communities identified.
Action 2
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to encourage and facilitate enhanced civic and 
community engagement
Action 3
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to enhance the ability of communities to shape 
their futures
Place
Action 4
In 2017, to identify communities that are endangered and to develop a programme of 
actions to support their needs
Action 5
To advocate on behalf of communities regarding local and regional policy development and 
its implementation
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, identify social needs that could be clarified further by 
appropriate research that would empower local communities to develop solutions to local 
issues or exploit sustainable development opportunities.  
Vision
Action 7
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding 
community reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal 
District
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Communities Index that will identify, 
measure and monitor the socio-economic well-being of communities within Cork

73
Local Economic And Community Plan
7. EDUCATION
Introduction
Economists have long held the view that investment in education, or human capital, is an important 
source of economic growth.  A more educated labour force is more mobile and adaptable, more 
innovative and creative in its thinking.  Beyond that, a more productive and better earning popu­
lation may produce a healthier environment with better functioning civil institutions, as well as all 
the benefits that flow to the business sector from that environment.
Hence, education linked to employment is at the centre of both the EU’s Europe 2020 Strategy and 
Ireland’s National Reform Strategy. 
Education Sector in Cork
The formal education sector in Cork covers a variety of organisations which represent the needs of 
citizens at different life stages right through from early years education to lifelong and further 
education. In 2015, approx. 65,000 residents were engaged in full and part-time education – from 
primary education to further education and training. 
  
Early years education lays the essential foundations for language acquisition, successful lifelong 
learning, social integration, personal development and employability (see also Family and Home 
Life section of this plan).   Primary and secondary level schools also play a significant role in the 
development of healthy communities and are often one of the focal points of community life. 
 
Third level institutions, such as CIT, UCC and the Cork Education and Training Board institutions, 
play a particularly important role in contributing to the socio-economic vitality of the region, as 
well as providing jobs and supporting local services, etc. They, and other associated institutions, 
also play a particularly important role in research and development. These third level institutions 
are further complemented by the work of other organisations and the private sector in providing 
courses and training for different needs - including further education and lifelong learning. This 
suite of institutions will be further enhanced by the creation of the planned for Munster Techno­
logical University (MTU), identified as a strategic structural change in the Regional Action Plan for 
Jobs. 
 
Outside of the formal education sector, it is recognised that there is a very important social role 
played by education also, often providing essential services through after-school programs, com­
munity-based organizations, museums, libraries, etc. 
National Context for Education
The government continues to be very active in the educational sector.  Numerous strategies and 
action plans either operate within the sector or are clearly linked to education.  Some of these 

74
include: 
▯
▯
Five Year Strategy for Further Education and Training (2014-2019) 
▯
▯
South West Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017
▯
▯
ICT Skills Action Plan 2014-2018
▯
▯
National Higher Education Strategy to 2030
▯
▯
Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004
▯
▯
Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures: the national policy framework for children and young peo­
ple 2014 - 2020.
▯
▯
National Strategy on Education for Sustainable Development
▯
▯
Intercultural Education Strategy, 2010-2015
▯
▯
Literacy and Numeracy for Learning and Life Strategy
▯
▯
Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS) (2005)
The headline target in relation to Education in Ireland is set out in the National Reform Programme, 
building on the targets set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy.  It is composed of two elements as 
follows:
To reduce the percentage of 18-24 year olds with at most lower secondary education and not in 
further education and training to 8%; to increase the share of 30-34 year olds who have completed 
tertiary or equivalent education to at least 60%.
According to Eurostat, Ireland is close to achieving the 8% target outlined, whilst at 51.9%, Ireland’s 
share of 30-34 year olds who have completed tertiary or equivalent education is the highest in 
Europe.  As a nation we continue to make positive progress on these targets.
  
Determining Educational Priorities for Cork
As a key regional asset, a strong and robust educational sector will be a key element in securing 
successful outcomes for many other of our key assets in Cork. Within an ageing population, the 
retention and attraction of high paying employment is critical to maintaining our economic status 
and overall quality of life.
 
Having regard to the breath of initiatives linked to the education sector, this plan does not seek to 
set out low level actions related to education. The formulation and delivery of such actions are 
largely in place already and can be enhanced by the identification of education as a key regional 
asset within this plan. 
However, in terms of the economic and social development of the county, education has an impor­
tant role to play in some of the following areas:
Education and Employment
The South West Region Action Plan for Jobs identifies a number of areas in which the education 
sector can assist in contributing to employment and economic growth.  In particular it:

75
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
recognises existing strengths and identifies additional opportunities for the education sector 
including training
▯
▯
seeks more systematic collaboration and co-operation with the business sector particularly 
through the creation of a Skills Forum. 
▯
▯
seeks the promotion and development of entrepreneurship 
▯
▯
recognises the importance of delivering skills required by enterprise across the spectrum of 
science, technology, engineering, maths and the arts (STEAM), which extends from primary to 
tertiary education
▯
▯
managing transitions to third level education
As the Cork economy grows, a key challenge will be to ensure that the education and employment 
sector identifies and addresses skills deficits and secures the resilience of the labour market in a 
global economy.  If Cork does not have employees with the appropriate skill set (or if it cannot retain 
them), then we will be left with a significant economic infrastructural deficit.  Planning to provide 
for the appropriate skillset needs will require very strong and active collaboration between both 
educational institutions and the business community. 
Education and Quality of Life:
The role of education is a much broader one than merely delivering workers for the labour market. 
Education can benefit children and adults alike in becoming active participants in the transforma­
tion and betterment of their societies, through both formal and informal means.  Opportunity exists 
to empower citizens, particularly those who are affected by disadvantage, and to improve their 
quality of life, by:
Tackling educational dropout
The Report on Retention Rates of Pupils in Second Level Schools in 2014 demonstrates that Cork 
County has a retention rate of 91.7% (above the state average of 90.1%) whilst Cork city has a rate 
of 89% which was the highest in the state for a city area.  Despite progress being made in recent 
years early school leaving still remains a serious challenge. It not only presents problems for the 
people involved but it also has economic and social consequences for society. Education is the 
most efficient means by which to safeguard against unemployment.  The risk of unemployment 
increases considerably the lower the level of education. Participation in high quality education has 
benefits not only for young people themselves but also for taxpayers and society. These benefits 
typically last over the course of an individual’s lifetime. Furthermore, there is a recognised cyclical 
effect associated with early school leaving, resulting in the children of early school leavers expe­
riencing reduced success in education. 
Promoting lifelong learning
Those aged 25-64 with only primary level qualifications are three times more likely to be unemployed 
than those with a third level qualification.  In Ireland it is clear that the lifelong learning opportu­
nities of those who are socially excluded and educationally disadvantaged contrast sharply with 
the opportunities of those who have completed second level and third level education. Therefore, 
lifelong education is a basic need, and second chance education and continuing education are vital, 
particularly for those who experienced educational disadvantage at an early stage.

76
Lifelong learning also has an important role to play in the achieving of the Government’s headline 
target adopted in the National Reform Programme on employment – where the overall target is to 
be reached through ‘greater participation of young people, older workers and low-skilled workers 
and the better integration of migrants’ (Government of Ireland, 2011).
More informal education also has a very important role to play in lifelong learning and for many it may be 
the only outlet they have to become informed.  As such the value of community based education needs 
enhanced recognition because of its very important social role in allowing citizens to make positive lifestyle 
choices.  
Strengthening Society
Education has the potential to promote a more sophisticated and inclusive society which in turn attracts 
other like-minded and educated citizens. In a cyclical manner, this reinforces and benefits both the economy 
and society further.  As an economically successful region founded on a strong educational infrastructure, 
Cork can afford its residents an opportunity to continue to live and work within the region. This in turn 
strengthens family, community and home life - which have been identified in the resident’s Quality of Life 
Survey as central assets to our region. 
    
Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
A strong educational sector is a vital asset in the ongoing economic and social development of Cork.   A 
high quality, efficient and equitable educational system at all levels, from early years through to adulthood, 
has a fundamental role to play in achieving the Europe 2020 and National Reform Programme goal of smart, 
sustainable and inclusive growth.  A focused educational strategy can achieve efficiency and can benefit 
the economy by providing a flexible, adaptable and skilled workforce.  It can complement existing strate­
gies such as the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs through a focus on creativity, innovation, problem 
solving and entrepreneurship.  By increasing educational opportunities, including informal education, the 
scope exists to reduce inequality, tackle disadvantage and contribute to the betterment of society.
Entrenpreneurship
With specific regard to entrepreneurship, EU studies suggest that entrepreneurship education is effective 
in generating sustainable, innovative and profitable business development. Entrepreneurship education 
can positively impact at all education levels and in a wide number of contexts. Hence, there is potential 
for a wide variety of entrepreneurship education and facilitation programs, all of which can provide im­
portant outcomes at various stages of a learner's life. 
The importance of entrepreneurship is reflected in the expansion of activity in this area by educational 
and enterprise related bodies, such as, CIT, UCC, Cork City and County Councils, Local Enterprise Offices, 
Cork Chamber, EI, Cork BIC, etc. These bodies have partnered to establish Cork Innovates, which seeks to 
foster an environment for the start-up, growth and retention of new enterprises.  
Entrepreneurship and innovation has no boundaries, in both metaphorical and practical terms. For example, 
Cork now hosts the European Space Industry Business Incubation Centre (at Tyndall), co-ordinates Nation­
al Space Week, will host the largest space event ever held in Ireland in 2017 in CIT, has companies in the 
Rubicon Centre who have received more funding from Horizon 2020 in the SME related call than any other 
companies in Europe, hosts the only science and discovery centre in the country based on the theme of 

77
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will remove barriers to education for residents at 
all life stages, and to target in particular the future educational needs of our planned for 
employment growth sectors 
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, in conjunction with the Human Capital Asset Management Group, to develop a 
programme of actions to provide for the key educational needs (having regard to the South 
West Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017 and the National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030) 
required to meet the projected future economic vision for the Cork region
Action 2
In 2016, in conjunction with the Human Capital Asset Management Group, to identify the key 
educational needs required to reflect the social characteristics that we value most within 
the Cork region
Action 3 
By 2018, in collaboration with educational institutions, to develop a programme of actions to 
facilitate access to further education by all residents who desire to do so
Action 4
By 2018, in collaboration with educational institutions, to develop a programme of actions 
to minimise costs to residents in accessing education 
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, recognise the important social and economic role played 
by entrepreneurship by developing a programme of actions to further support and enhance 
entrepreneurial education and enterprise development within Cork.
‘space’ in collaboration with Cork City Council (Blackrock Castle Observatory, engaging with over 70,000 
people annully) and has the only satellite communications facility in the country in Mildeton. ‘Space’ is 
also linked to advance manufacturing.  This example highlights the vast potential of innovation for the 
region. 
Place
Action 6
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions, relating to transport, accommodation, etc., that 
will facilitate access by students to education facilities
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration with the local authorities and the Dept. 
of Education, to identify a programme of actions that will facilitate the enhancement of 
existing primary and secondary educational facilities and the delivery of new facilities in a 
manner that maximises the investment benefits

78
Action 8
During the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration with third level and further education 
institutions, to develop a programme of actions that will facilitate UCC, CIT and other 
educational institutions in developing and enhancing their campuses
Action 9
By 2018, to identify a programme of actions that will support UCC and CIT in enhancing their 
international educational rankings
Action 10
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a programme of actions to further enhance 
alignment and collaboration between primary, post-primary and tertiary education to 
further embed the concepts and skills that underpin research and innovation. 
Vision
Action 11
Over the lifetime of this plan, to reduce to 8% the percentage of 18-24 year olds with at most 
lower secondary education and not in further education and training; to increase the share 
of 30-34 year olds who have completed tertiary or equivalent education to at least 60%
Action 12
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Education Index to monitor and measure the 
key education attainments and experiences of Cork residents

79
Local Economic And Community Plan
8. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT 
& INNOVATION
Economic theory emphasises the accumulation of R&D and human capital in explaining economic 
growth. Ireland is one of the leading Research, Development and Innovation (RDI) locations in the 
world. It offers an excellent commercial, political and social environment for companies to carry 
out successful and profitable RDI activities. This has attracted global leaders in key high-tech in­
dustries to undertake RDI projects in areas such as pharmaceuticals, bio-technology, medical devices, 
ICT and financial services. A high degree of collaboration between industry, academia, state agen­
cies and regulatory authorities drives Ireland’s dynamic RDI sector. This is further supported by a 
highly pro-business government policy base.
Cork is home to a wide range of existing research centres of excellence and cluster enablers, such 
as, CIT, UCC, Rubicon Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Alimentary Pharmabiotic Centre, Governance 
Risk and Compliance Technology Centre, APC Microbiome Institute, European Centre for Clinical 
Trials in Rare Diseases (UCC), Nimbus Centre, CAPPA, TEC, Halpin Centre, MEDIC, Hincks Centre for 
Entrepreneurship Excellence (CIT), MaREI Centre for Marine and Renewable Energy, Shannon ABC, 
INFANT Irish Centre for Fetal and Neonatal Translational Research, Moorepark Animal & Grassland 
Research and Innovation Centre, Crean Centre for Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development, 
Irish Academy of Hospitality and Tourism (ITT), IMERC (Irish Marine Energy Cluster), NMCI (National 
Maritime College of Ireland) and more. 
In addition, development of the Cork Science and Innovation Park, the National Health Inovation 
Hub and other similar ventures, will add to the suite of research and development facilities and 
opportunities within the region.
A world-class research system, designed to work with and for the benefit of industry, is being further 
developed thanks to an ongoing investment of over €8 billion from the Irish government, recognis­
ing that talent, creativity, collaboration and networks are key characteristics of this process. 
While innovation comes from human capital, it is supported by physical infrastructure. Smart 
specialisation and innovation needs to be underpinned by similarly smart infrastructure – as also 
set out in Clustering, Physical Infrastructure and Connectivity sections herein. 
Innovation 2020: Ireland’s Strategy for Research and Development, Science and Technology under­
pins Government’s future focus in this area. This strategy commences the process of increased 
multi-disciplinary approaches to various socio-economic challenges. It also seeks to promote and 
support the coming together of disciplines, such as, engineering, science, business and the human­
ities. 

80
 Local Economic And Community Plan
WHY IRELAND
Cork
Cork has demonstrated itself to be a driver of innovation, knowledge creation and technology 
transfer and, therefore, has attracted high levels of national funding for research and development 
projects.  The expansion of knowledge and innovation within the Cork Gateway (as represented by 
the growing number of the labour force who have third-level qualifications), is further reinforced 
by increasing research and development funding allocations. 
Research Development & Innovation in Cork consistently outperforms EU averages:
▯
▯
Largest amount of EU funding per capita in Ireland
▯
▯
UCC is top-performing university in Ireland over past 5 years in terms of research in­
come
▯
▯
CIT is top-performing institute of technology over past 5 years in terms of research 
income
▯
▯
Cork Smart Gateway – collaborative project to develop the next generation Smart 
Agenda for the Cork Region
▯
▯
Top performing region in partnering with industry
▯
▯
Annual spend on R&D is approx €150m between UCC and CIT  Over 35,000 third level 
students in Cork
▯
▯
Almost 50% of students in Cork are enrolled in science and engineering at 3rd level 
(reflecting the historic focus of RDI on these sectors and which is sought to be ad­
dressed via Innovation 2020)
Unique Advantages 
Ireland offers a strong and growing RDI environment, complemented by a robust Intellectual Prop­
erty (IP) regime. A young, skilled and well-educated workforce, with strong technological and 
business skills, and a low corporate tax rate, further strengthens this environment. The retention 
and development of our young potential talent, within a collaborative network, is critical and is a 
central pillar that underpins this LECP.
    

81
Local Economic And Community Plan
Promote Collaboration
Cork has strong collaborative linkages between industry, academia, public agencies and regulatory 
authorities to improve an already vibrant RDI sector. This collaborative success can be built upon, 
underpinned by smart infrastructure – such as the development of the Cork Science and Innovation 
Park, improved ICT, expanded public transport, etc.
The recent announcement (in January 2016) by the Minister of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation and 
Minister for Health of the approval of Health Innovation Hub Ireland (a UCC led consortium with CIT, 
NUIG, TCD and their relevant hospital groups) to foster links between healthcare and vital technol­
ogies further galvanises collaboration and is a example of what can be achieved via collaboration. 
As noted by Minister Bruton at the announcement, "The commitment by Government to a facility 
such as the Health Innovation Hub also sends out a very strong message to international companies 
considering investing in Ireland that we are committed to developing even stronger links between 
the health and enterprise sectors and the high level R&D driving each sector. As part of our long 
term plan this will help turn good ideas into good jobs and ultimately make a major contribution 
in a drive towards full employment.” At the same announcement Minister Varadkar commented that, 
"It's also a good example of joined-up Government as it involves two Government Departments, 
two Government agencies and the universities.” 
In additional to regional and national collaboration, international collaboration is also critical in 
the RDI sector, with Cork based researchers presenting and presenting research outputs in high 
ranking journals and conferences. This international focus is reflected in CIT’s hosting of the 3E 
Conference - ECSB Entrepreneurship Education Conference in May 2017.
Furthermore, alignment and collaboration between primary, post-primary and tertiary education 
in the area of RDI has the potential to ensure that research and innovation concepts are embedded 
within our developing human capital. 
Unlocking Investment potential
Cork has opportunities to further enhance its existing world-class research system, which is already 
designed to work with and for the benefit of industry. This can be further developed by exploiting 
the Irish Governments €8.2 billion investment strategy for Science,Technology and Innovation.
Centralised Data Centre
By establishing an infrastructure to deliver a centralised data centre or data hub, we will facilitate 
the delivery and sharing of public information and datasets. This will empower public sector au­
thorities, citizens, research centres and business to make informed decisions and to feed research 
and innovation – see Data Co-Ordination section of this plan. 
Support Mechanisms & Financial Support
A centralised data centre could play a pivotal role in identifying the support mechanisms, oppor­
tunities and incentives for industry in the Cork region. The collation of information from organisa­
tions such as IDA Ireland, Science Foundation Ireland, Sustainable Energy Authority Ireland and 
Local Enterprise Offices into one central location would be a key asset in streamlining the work and 

82
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will create and sustain a culture and environment 
of innovation, resulting in a high functioning research eco-system within Cork that 
facilitates enterprise to flourish within the region
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions relating to the RDI 
sector in the Cork region that will support the implementation of the South West Region 
Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017 
Action 2
In 2017, within the context of our existing centres of excellence and building on successes to 
date, identify further RDI opportunities within the Cork region
Action 3
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions for the Cork region focused on the delivery 
of the 14 Priority Areas for Government Investment in Research 2013-2017 – and beyond 
(amended as required on implementation of Innovation 2020) 
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to engage with and support the Regional Innovation Forum 
to be established under the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017 
Action 5
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions that will enhance the commercialisation of 
research within the Cork region
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a programme of actions to further support and 
enhance international collaborations between researchers and research institutions based 
in Cork.
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to provide support for 
entrepreneurs (both start-ups and existing companies), to allow companies to develop 
within their own locations. 
financing opportunities of business, industry and research centres. This will be essential to ensur­
ing that companies are able to improve their facilities, resources and other supports needed to 
establish and expand their RDI operations.
Action Plan for Jobs
The South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017 sets out a range of actions to develop re­
gional research and innovation. The LECP seeks to support those actions identified, within the Cork 
context. 

83
Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 14
Within the lifetime of this plan, support the Data Co-Ordination Asset Management Group in the estab­
lishment of a centralised data centre or data hub, to facilitate the delivery and sharing of public informa­
tion and datasets
Action 15
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish an RDI Index that identifies, and commences the measurement 
of, Actions for the RDI sector
Action 16
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a programme of actions to complement the future recommen­
dations of the Irish Research Council for the implementation of Innovation 2020, with particular focus on 
the promotion and facilitation of inter-disciplinary collaboration and interaction
Place
Action 9
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions that will facilitate the retention and attraction of 
researchers to the Cork region
Action 10
By 2018, in collaboration with the Connectivity Asset Management Group and in order 
to enhance research opportunities, to develop a programme of actions to facilitate the 
creation of a physical network of research facilities within the Cork region
Action 11
During the lifetime of this plan, and in collaboration with the local authorities, landowners 
and infrastructure delivery agencies, to support the development of the Cork Science and 
Innovation Park to serve the Cork region
Action 12
In 2017, building on successes to date in this sector, develop a programme of actions that 
will meet the demand for incubation spaces and hot desk facilities within the Cork region,  
including the development of Stage 2 Incubation facilities to support companies who have 
secured investment and are expanding without the need to provide capital for fit-out of 
facilities or sign long-term leases.
Action 13
In 2017, to identify a programme of actions that will support research institutions in 
maximising their ability to attract research funding across all disciplines
Action 8
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a programme of actions to complement the future 
recommendations of the Irish Research Council’s for the implementation of Innovation 2020, 
with particular focus on the promotion and facilitation of inter-disciplinary collaboration 
and interaction. 

84
 Local Economic And Community Plan
9. HOUSING
As places, residential environments are critical for human well-being. The majority of our working 
time is spent in buildings and our leisure time is spent largely at home, or close by in our neigh­
bourhoods. How, where and in what form we construct our houses, neighbourhoods and commu­
nities is also critical in terms our collective endeavours toward creating efficient, enjoyable and 
environmentally robust places to live. Furthermore, the financial cost of housing construction, its 
supporting infrastructure provision and running costs have a fundamental impact on our cost of 
living and our ability to maintain international cost competitiveness. 
These matters combined makes housing a critical asset in terms of our individual and collective 
quality of life, as well as the sustainability of our overall well-being. Resident’s desire housing that 
provides for; affordability, suitability for their needs, choice (type and location), reinforcement of 
individual values, and, is suitable to all life stages.
Context 
The importance of the housing sector is reflected in our national housing policies, under the Na­
tional Housing Policy (2011), the National Reform Programme (2015) and the National Planning 
Framework (currently under consideration). In addition, the recent Urban Regeneration and Housing 
Act 2015 seeks to implement measures to facilitate the delivery of new, suitable housing. 
Our national history of boom and bust construction 
cycles is the manifestation of various influences 
that impact upon our construction sector. The 
stabilising of this sector into a consistent and 
reliable growth trajectory is central to the 
provision of high quality and affordable housing. 
In addition, there is a need to reinforce the main­
streaming of the provision of housing for all sectors 
– private and public, owner occupation and rental, 
varying household sizes, minority needs within our 
society (disabled, student, travellers, homeless, etc.) 
- supported by the provision of housing choice to all. This formula is achievable, but requires the 
combined and focussed efforts of all actors in this sector. The Cork Joint Housing Strategy suggests 
that a Joint Housing Strategy Stakeholders’ Forum should be established, to include representatives 
of the main stakeholder groups dealing with housing issues in Cork. 
In terms of housing scale, the projected population increase nationally up to 2046 is in excess of 1 
million persons and for every one million additional population we will require approx. 400,000 
additional housing units.  These figures are echoed by the Economic and Social Research Institute 
(ESRI), who estimate that the country as a whole requires between 15,000 – 20,000 new homes to 
100,000
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
1
9
9
0
2
0
0
1
1
9
9
9
1
9
9
8
1
9
9
7
1
9
9
6
1
9
9
5
1
9
9
4
1
9
9
3
1
9
9
2
1
9
9
1
2
0
0
2
2
0
1
2
2
0
1
1
2
0
1
0
2
0
0
9
2
0
0
8
2
0
0
7
2
0
0
6
2
0
0
5
2
0
0
4
2
0
0
3
2
0
1
3
N
u
m
b
e
r
Total House Completions
                                                                                   Source: DECLG

85
Local Economic And Community Plan
be built each year. During 2012, a total of 8,488 houses were built in Ireland.
As discussed previously in this document, the future National Planning Framework has a key role 
in determining the spatial distribution of our future additional population and it is a central theme 
of this plan that Ireland will benefit from a targeted population growth for the Cork region. This is 
a key output that will frame housing policy and housing provision within the Cork region for the 
coming decades.
 
Cork Housing
The overall requirement for housing in County Cork is set out in the Core Strategy of the Cork County 
Development Plan 2014, informed by the Cork Joint Housing Strategy. This Core Strategy indicates 
that about 7,094 units will need to be constructed per annum if the full South Western Regional 
Planning Guidelines (SWRPG) population target for the city and county is to be achieved.
 
The type, size and location of future Cork housing is informed by a number of critical inter-related 
considerations. These include; future population size, future population profile / needs, future 
employment / income profile, employment growth locations, transport network expansion, energy 
and environmental considerations, as well as the need to create sustainable residential communi­
ties (as referenced in the Guidelines on Sustainable Residential Development in Urban Areas). In 
summary, housing provision is at the very core of how we organise ourselves as a society. 
Socio-Economic Importance of Housing
Having a place to call home is at the very centre of our well-being. Having a suitable home reinforc­
es our value to society and is a critical foundation for our productive engagement with society. 
Some sections of our communities, both economically active and inactive, struggle to afford a home 
that meets their household needs at an affordable cost. 
The economic impact of housing affordability cannot be overstated. Housing costs (followed by 
transportation costs) represents the most significant element of household expenditure across the 
state. The CSO Household Budget Survey 2009-2010 indicates that, on average, over 18% of our 
disposal income is spent on housing costs. This percentage rises to above 20% for the private owned 
and private rented sectors, while in urban areas it is approx. 20% and in rural areas is approx. 16%. 
For certain age and income cohorts, expenditure on housing can exceed 40% of their disposable 
income reflecting the cyclical and sometimes volatile nature of our housing sector. 
A long term average financial commitment of approx. 20% of our disposable income to housing is a 
significant economic issue for our residents, our economy and our society. Housing access, choice 
and cost – to own or rent – are key issues for our future economic performance, where the retention 
and attraction of young, well educated workers is critical.
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will provide for sustainable stock and housing choice 
that enables the people of Cork, now and in the future, to have attractive places to live, suited 
to their needs and at costs that they can afford whilst ensuring the protection of natural 
environmental resources and in a manner that is compatible with the requirements of the 
Birds and Habitats Directives

86
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan to develop a programme of actions to assist in the delivery of 
the Cork Joint Housing Strategy 2013 and the housing objectives of the Cork County Development 
Plan 2014
Action 2
During the lifetime of this plan to inform and collaborate with the Physical Infrastructure and 
Connectivity Asset Management Groups, to ensure that the physical infrastructure needs re­
quired to facilitate housing provision are adequately met whilst ensuring the protection of 
natural environmental resources and in a manner that is compatible with the requirements 
of the Birds and Habitats Directives
Action 3
On publication of the key outputs from the National Planning Strategy and the Regional Spatial 
and Economic Strategy, develop a programme of actions to inform a future revision of the Cork 
Joint Housing Strategy 2013 to have regard to the future NSF and RSES
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that will contribute to the 
provision of a sustainable consistent supply of housing to serve the Cork region
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that will minimise the costs 
– direct and indirect - to residents accessing housing within the Cork region
Place
Action 6
By 2018, to assist the Rural Cork and Urban Cork Asset Management Groups in their completion 
of  an audit of existing residential stock and in their development of a system of on-going 
monitoring
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that will maximise housing 
choice – by type and location – to residents within the Cork region whilst ensuring the pro­
tection of natural environmental resources and in a manner that is compatible with the re­
quirements of the Birds and Habitats Directives
Action 8
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that will contribute to the 
provision of high quality housing within the Cork region
Action 9
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop vernacular building standards that have a low 
environmental impact, both in construction and use, and are appropriate to our climate

87
Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 10
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding 
housing provision reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents
within each Municipal District
Action 11
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Housing Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, permanent Actions for the housing sector within the Cork region

88
10. PHYSICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE
The term infrastructure can mean different things. Historically, infrastructure was largely seen as 
physical assets on which a place relied – bridges, roads, piping networks, etc. However, our social 
and economic infrastructure now extends to also include, education, telecommunications, premis­
es, networks, and many more aspects of our varied social and economic endeavours.
 
Collectively, the other sections in this plan address the overall infrastructure needs of the region. 
The sections of this plan on Connectivity, Urban Cork, Rural Cork, Cork Airport, Cork Harbour, Em­
ployment / Income and Education, address infrastructure needs and actions specific to those assets 
– including, public transport, telecommunications, community and employment facilities, air and 
sea linkages, etc. 
This section, Physical Infrastructure, seeks to address overarching infrastructure - water service, 
flood risk management and waste management.
Context
The driving force behind Corks future infrastructure needs will be population and workforce growth. 
With Ireland’s current population predicted to grow by between 1 million and 1.5 million by 2046, 
the future National Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies will play a 
central role in establishing where future infrastructure investment will be required.
 
Cork has the physical and environmental capacity to accommodate significant spatial growth that 
can deliver the national vision as previously articulated under the former National Spatial Strategy. 
The Cork region has the potential to play a leading role in creating a balanced national socio-eco­
nomic model and the critical policy path to achieving same is via the National Planning Framework 
process (which it is anticipated will ultimately feed into the targets and policies of the Regional 
Socio-Economic Strategies that will guide development at the regional and sub-regional levels). 
With a clear population target in place for the Cork region, set by the future National Planning 
Framework and the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, it will be possible to identify a target­
ed infrastructure programme to deliver a plan-led expansion of Cork as a viable, competitive, in­
ternational, city-based region. 
In the absence of harnessing the growth potential of Cork, a number of important issues of nation­
al significance will likely arise:
▯
▯
Attracting inward investment to Cork will be constrained, thereby losing investment opportu­
nities for Ireland
▯
▯
The significant proportion of the approx. additional 1 million / 1.5 million national population 

89
Local Economic And Community Plan
by 2046 will locate in Leinster – which the former NSS identified as unsustainable 
▯
▯
Further stresses will be placed on GDA infrastructure provision, leading to a potential range of 
inefficiencies and lost national competitiveness
▯
▯
Reduced choice for residents as to where to live and work within Ireland 
▯
▯
Having regard to our future national population projections, an important opportunity to 
achieve sustainable, balanced social and economic growth in Ireland will be lost
It is important to recognise that the rationale that underpins inward investment is directly linked 
to scale of existing and planned-for population. Within the national context, Cork has a sufficient 
population base upon which further growth can be built via infrastructure investment, as well as 
the capacity to potentially offer a high rate of return on that investment.
   
Key Physical Infrastructure
Our key physical infrastructure (as opposed to social and economic infrastructure) includes:
▯
▯
Transport – addressed generally under Connectivity section (with air and sea addressed 
under Cork Airport and Cork Harbour respectively)
▯
▯
Telecommunications – addressed under Connectivity section also
▯
▯
Water Services
▯
▯
Waste Management
▯
▯
Surface Water and Flood Risk Management
Water Services
Water services include wastewater disposal, drinking water and general water supply. This 
infrastructure is now managed by Irish Water and is critical in facilitating community and 
economic growth – as can be seen from the current water services constraints experienced 
within the Dublin region. 
Again set within the future National Planning Framework and the Regional Spatial and Economic 
Strategy, a strategic and medium / long term strategy is required in this sector. Cork is currently 
well served by its water services infrastructure, however, future water services management strat­
egies will need to ensure:
▯
▯
Maximum gains from investment
▯
▯
Ensuring that businesses and communities are adequately served 
▯
▯
Pricing certainty
▯
▯
Supply certainty
▯
▯
Environmental integrity
Surface Water and Flood Risk Management 
The management of our surface water and potential flood risk is of paramount importance. Appro­

90
priate and effective management in this area protects our social and economic investments, while 
also mitigating impacts on our supporting natural environment. 
Cork County Council has embedded rigorous flood risk analysis into its land use planning process 
and the Office of Public Works (OPW) (in partnership with Cork County Council) is advancing a number 
of Major Flood Relief Schemes in the county. Flood Risk Assessments and Management Studies are 
also being advanced for a number of areas which may lead to further works to mitigate flood risk.
 
Waste Management
National policy on waste management is set out in A Resource Opportunity, published in 2012, and 
sets out the measures through which Ireland will make the further progress necessary to become 
a recycling society, with a clear focus on resource efficiency and the virtual elimination of land filling 
of municipal waste. 
In 2014, the EU issued Towards a Circular Economy – a Zero Waste Programme for Europe, identify­
ing a circular process that minimises residual waste through efficiencies in:
▯
▯
Product design
▯
▯
Production
▯
▯
Distribution
▯
▯
Consumption
▯
▯
Collection
▯
▯
Recycling
 The delivery of national and European policy will be ensured through mandatory regional waste 
management plans currently under development. 
Innovation, Monitoring and Collaboration
Innovation in the provision of infrastructure is an area that is likely to yield significant gains linked 
to technological advancement. A good example of this is the development of smart infrastructure 
by the Cork Smart Gateway. By identifying and developing Cork as a region that identifies and de­
velops technology-based solutions to supporting infrastructure provision, we will continue to create 
built-in efficiencies and enhance our international reputation. 
Cork County Council continues to develop and maintain comprehensive monitoring of regional 
physical infrastructure. This monitoring regime, coupled with close working relationships with key 
service delivery agencies operating in these sectors, has facilitated strategic investment decision 
making that has resulted in maximum gain across a range of social, community and environmental 
considerations.
A combination of strategic oversight by all service delivery agencies in the physical infrastructure 
sphere, as well as consistent monitoring and sharing of information, will ensure that the region 
achieves maximum gains from investment, ensures that businesses and communities are adequate­
ly served, that supply and pricing certainty is in place, and, that environmental integrity in maintained. 

91
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate sustainable actions that will protect and enhance Cork’s existing 
physical infrastructure assets, by identifying the future physical infrastructural needs of the region
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan and via ongoing consultation, ensure that the physical infra­
structure needs of businesses and communities are adequately met in a manner which is 
compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources of the County.
Action 2
During the lifetime of this plan and via ongoing consultation, ensure that pricing and supply 
certainty regarding physical infrastructure provision to meet the needs of businesses and 
communities are appropriately met
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, advocate for and identify opportunities for the advance pro­
vision of physical infrastructure to serve the community and economic needs of the Cork 
region in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources 
of the County.
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to support and contribute to the development of smart infra­
structure within the Cork region in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural 
environmental resources of the County.
Place
Action 5
By 2018, to complete an audit of all existing physical infrastructure and to develop a system 
of on-going monitoring
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme programme of actions that will 
maximise socio-economic gains from physical infrastructure investment in a manner which is 
compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources of the County.
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, to continue to advocate for, and facilitate, regional collabora­
tion by local authorities, key stakeholders and delivery agencies in the area of physical infra­
structure provision
Action 8
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of  actions to avoid increasing flood 
risk , as well as identifying interventions that will both reduce flood risk and improve the 
natural environment

92
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 9
Within the lifetime of this plan and having regard to the outputs of the National Planning 
Strategy and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, to collaborate with the Rural Cork 
and Urban Cork Asset Management Groups in their development of a sustainable spatial 
and transportation plan compatible with the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats 
Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with the programmes of infrastructure 
delivery agencies. The outputs of this spatial and transportation plan for the Cork region 
will be consistent with the future NPF and RSES
Action 10
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Physical Infrastructure Index to measure and 
monitor Cork’s regional physical infrastructure

93
Local Economic And Community Plan
Our Sustainable Future: A Vision for Ireland (Irish Government 2012), sets out ‘the challenges facing 
us and how we might address them in making sure that quality of life and general wellbeing can be 
improved and sustained in the decades to come.’ This strategy recognises the inter-connectedness 
of our economy, transport systems, educational sectors, etc. with our natural environment. It also 
recognises the real threat that climate related changes to our natural environment poses to our 
collective well-being – social and economic. 
The word sustainable, as used in this LECP document, means that ‘we have considered - and will 
continue to consider - the long-term net consequences on the natural environment (locally and 
globally), as well as on our personal and social well-being, choosing a route that is most likely to 
give the best possible outcome.’
Natural Environment
The environment within which we live is critical to our long term well being. Biodiversity, ecosystems 
and natural resources are our natural capital. It is widely recognised that our socio-economic 
prosperity depends on maintaining and enhancing these natural assets and to do so requires us to 
take the long term consequences into account when making decisions. Our natural resources (land, 
water and forests) provide us with food, clean water, building materials and other essentials, while 
the quality of our air is fundamental to our existence.
 
As an economic asset, the Irish Government estimates that our biodiversity is worth over €2.5 billion 
per annum, contributing to our economic performance is a wide range of ways. As a social asset, 
our natural environment plays an equally important role in our well-being, as the quality of place 
within which we live.
 
Hence, if Cork is to achieve its strategic goal of creating a place where people choose to live and 
work, it is critical that we underpin that goal by maintaining a high quality natural environment. Of 
course, natural habitats and ecosystems do not recognise political and other manmade boundaries, 
and so we are impacted upon by behaviours and events from all over the world. However, by man­
aging the stewardship of our own natural environment, we will minimise impacts arising from our 
own behaviours and those of others. We can do this by stress testing our social and economic 
choices against likely environmental impacts arising. 
Legislation and guidelines exist to facilitate the testing of our choices against environmental con­
sequences, such as via Strategic Environmental Assessment and Appropriate Assessment. These 
processes ensure that the natural environmental impacts likely to arise from the choices we make 
are considered and amended if required. Categories for consideration include, but are not limited 
to, impacts upon:
11. NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE

94
▯
▯
Air
▯
▯
Soil
▯
▯
Water / Groundwater
▯
▯
Species 
▯
▯
Habitats
Climate Change
The scientific evidence indicates that the Earth’s climate is changing, While climate change has 
occurred many times throughout the geological history of this planet, the international consensus 
is that the nature and pace of this change is being determined by mankind’s behaviour. Furthermore, 
it is predicted that climate change will have disastrous effects for many areas of the planet and, in 
fact, these effects are already being observed. 
While Ireland has been described as one of those global location that may be least impacted upon 
under various climate change scenarios, having regard to the complexities of climate systems this 
cannot be guaranteed. Furthermore, even minor climate changes can have significant impacts.
Climate change will result in a range of impacts across a number of sectors and is likely to exacer­
bate existing vulnerabilities. As our moderns societies are largely linked to fixed infrastructure, 
removal from potential impacts will not be easily facilitated. Two central policy planks exist to 
climate change policy; mitigation and adaption. 
Mitigation
Mitigation refers to actions to reduce emissions of the greenhouse gases that are driving climate 
change. It includes strategies to reduce activities that give rise to greenhouse gases and enhance 
sinks for greenhouse gas. However, it is accepted that, even if countries around the world succeed 
in limiting and then reducing greenhouse gas emissions, the climate system will continue to respond 
to the atmospheric build-up of greenhouse gases over past decades.
 
That is not to say that mitigation is not warranted. Without mitigation, we will simply make what 
looks like a bad situation very much worse. Ireland has a range of emission targets to meet by 2020 
and is currently drafting a National Mitigation Plan to 2050, the primary objective of which will be 
to track the implementation of measures already underway and identify additional measures to 
reduce GHG emissions. 
Adaption
Climate change adaptation refers to the adjustment or preparation of natural or human systems to 
a new or changing environment, with the aim of moderating harm or exploiting beneficial opportu­
nities. 
Local authorities are now charged with developing Local Adaptation Plans that must identify adap­
tation actions required to avoid or reduce the adverse impacts of climate change and to take ad­
vantage of any positive impacts. These plans will require the identification of key assets (human, 

95
Local Economic And Community Plan
physical, social, economic, etc) and the likely impacts of climate changes on these key assets. A 
plan to protect these assets will then be prepared. 
Clearly the LECP process will contribute to the adaption strategy for Cork county and our future 
strategy will be an important tool in protecting and enhancing those socio-economic assets iden­
tified herein. 
Key Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions relating to the management of Cork’s key assets that will 
ensure the long-term net consequences on the natural environment (locally and globally), as 
well as on our personal and social well-being, are considered in accordance with requirements 
of environmental legislation, choosing a route that will give the best possible outcome for the 
environment as well as for people
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to promote the critical role that our natural envi­
ronment plays in supporting our collective endeavours and in supporting our Key Assets
 
Action 2
By 2018, to complete an audit of Cork’s natural infrastructure and to develop a programme of 
actions to monitor same
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to support Cork becoming 
a centre for excellence in climate change mitigation and/or emissions reductions
Place
Action 4
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions to mitigate harmful emissions from within the 
Cork region, set within the context of the future National Mitigation Plan for Ireland
Action 5
In 2017, to advise Cork County Council in its development of a Local Climate Change Adaption 
Plan in order to facilitate the future proofing the natural and built infrastructure supporting 
the Cork region
Action 6
In 2017, in consultation with the Connectivity Asset Management Group, to identify a programme 
of actions to support the creation of urban green corridors to facilitate the non-motorised 
movement of people and other species? Within the Cork urban environment

96
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 8 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Natural Environment and Climate Change Index 
to monitor and measure the environmental performance and climate related future proofing 
of the Cork region
Action 9 
During the lifetime of this plan, to identify land use policies that will enhance carbon seques­
tration, woodland regeneration, retention of bogs and flood relief
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, support the implementation within Cork County of the Nation­
al Biodiversity Plan & the National Pollinator Plan

97
Local Economic And Community Plan
12. ENERGY
Energy is at the core of all human endeavours. Since the mid-1800s when man first harnessed and 
exploited energy on an industrial scale, global production, consumption and innovation have grown 
exponentially.  This growth has transformed modern life, providing for opportunity on a scale never 
previously witnessed by mankind.
 
However, if we are to maintain the gains made over the past one hundred and fifty years without 
endangering the planet via harmful emissions, we need to transition our fossil fuel energy based 
societies to energy sources that are more sustainable in the long term. This transition will provide 
social and economic security, as, without reliable, cost-effective and environmentally compatible 
energy sources, we are unable to plan for and deliver sustainable lifestyles.
The Government’s recent publication, Ireland’s Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 2015-2030 
is a complete energy policy update, which sets out a framework to guide policy between now and 
2030. 
Ireland’s Energy
During the period 1990–2012 Ireland’s total annual primary energy requirement grew in absolute 
terms by 39% (1.5% per annum on average). However, since 2007, overall primary energy use has 
decreased by 19%, driven largely by the downturn in economic activity and by gains in energy effi­
ciency. Primary energy use is expected to rise again in the coming decade, with population increas­
es and improved economic performance. 
With a continued significant reliance on oil as our primary energy source, and in particular import­
ed oil, Ireland is susceptible to international oil price fluctuations, reducing emissions targets, 
geopolitical and other challenges. In Ireland we import a significant 90% of our energy supply, albeit 
reduced from 98% in the early 1990s. This compares poorly with an EU average of approx. 55%. Most 
of our imports are currently sourced in EU and OECD countries, however, these sources will also 
potentially come under threat in the next two decades from increasing scarcity. Future reliance on 
non-traditional trading partners, as well having regard to our relatively small share of market demand 
and our peripheral location, leaves Ireland particularly vulnerable in energy terms.
  
The development of alternative energy sources and increased energy efficiency are central to overall 
energy policy in Ireland. However, energy use reduction is a complex subject, having regard to the 
various ways in which we use it. Electricity, transport fuels, construction and spatial formations, 
etc. will each require a targeted suite of policy responses and actions.
 
Furthermore, the EU energy vision for Europe is centred on a European energy network that is based 
on a high level of connectedness between member states. Ireland already has an interconnector 
with the UK through which electricity is imported and further interconnectors are high on the EUs 
list of priorities.

98
Renewable Energy
Ireland’s National Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP), 2010, sets out the contribution envisaged 
from renewable energy in each of the electricity, heating and transport sectors. The target is for 
16% of the national gross final consumption of energy should be from renewable sources by 2020.
The Government plans that by 2020 this overall target will be delivered by approximately:
▯
▯
40% consumption from renewable sources in the electricity sector,
▯
▯
12% of energy consumption in the heat sector from renewables and
▯
▯
10% of transport energy from renewables.
Energy Efficiency
Complementary to energy production, is energy efficiency. Efficient use of energy is an area of broad 
consideration, including for example, improved building performance (e.g. insulation), increased use 
of technology, greater awareness of energy wastage, use of alternative transport modes, clustering 
of services, etc.
 
Government has initiated a range of supports to encourage reduced energy usage, such as, subsi­
dies for electric vehicles, grants for home improvements, smart metering, etc. It has sought to 
encourage the transition to a more sustainable energy profile without undermining economic 
performance.   
Cork 
Cork plays a strategic role in energy provision in Ireland, as in County Cork 1,238 MW of electricity 
is currently generated from conventional fossil fuel power stations and hydro electric plants. In 
addition, 25% of all national energy is produced in one square mile at the Whitegate refinery, with 
90% of the oil reserves held in the state stored here and elsewhere in the Cork region.  Furthermore, 
Cork is the only location to date in Ireland where offshore gas reserves have been brought ashore 
– from the Kinsale, Seven Heads and Ballycotton fields.
 
As EU and Government policy is centred on creating an interconnected European energy network 
that plugs into an efficient national grid, energy policy has not been discussed in detail at a County 
level. While Cork has policies to facilitate the exploitation of its energy potential and to give effect 
to national policies, it does not – for example – have a specific energy generation target to meet. 
Nor does Cork have a per capita energy reduction target to meet. This is not unreasonable, consid­
ering the national and European policy focus.
However, having regard to the Cork region’s energy assets and the regional expertise developed 
within the energy sector, potential exists for Cork to take a leading role in the advancement of local 
energy policy and restructuring - building on the excellent work of Energy Cork, UCC, CIT, MERC, 
Tyndall, and many other bodies and institutes within the region. While energy generation within 
Cork is largely feed into the national grid, opportunities for local energy-related innovation exist 
to be exploited.
 Micro and on-site generation, district heating, compressed natural gas and electric vehicles, spatial 

99
Local Economic And Community Plan
planning and public transportation, etc. have the combined ability to play a not insignificant role 
in the energy story of Cork. By reducing our overall regional energy usage and increasing our sus­
tainable energy sources, the Cork region has the potential to become a national and international 
leader in the energy sector (with a range of attendant benefits), increase its attractiveness for 
inward investment and minimise impacts from future energy fluctuations. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will reduce Cork’s overall energy usage, increase the 
proportional usage of non-fossil based fuels generated within the region in a manner which 
is compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources of the County and promote 
Cork’s overall potential within the energy sector
Opportunities
Action 1
Within the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration with key stakeholders, and, within the 
context of the policies set down in Ireland’s Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 
2015-2030, draft a Strategic Energy Plan compatible with the requirements of the SEA, Birds 
and Habitats Directives for the Cork region that will identify a range of actions required to 
achieve increased energy efficiencies and increased local sources of sustainable energy, 
within medium term targets set out for the region.
Action 2
By 2018, in collaboration with Cork’s energy-based research institutions, to draft a scoping 
report on the development of an Energy Research Plan for the Cork region, to maximise the 
energy-based research potential within Cork in a manner which is compatible with protecting 
the natural environmental resources of the County
Vision
Action 5
In 2018, develop a Cork Energy Index that will identify, measure and monitor energy use and 
generation within the Cork region
Place
Action 3
In 2016, to develop a programme of policies to minimise the usage of energy in the residential, 
industrial and transportation use within the Cork region
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to identify a programme of land use policies and actions to 
support renewable energy generation at, including micro-generation, subject to normal land 
use planning considerations

100
 Local Economic And Community Plan
13. CLUSTERING
Many of Europe’s most innovative and economically successful countries e.g. Denmark, Norway, 
Finland, Spain and Germany have implemented cluster policies with great success over the past two 
decades to support industry and increase employment at a regional level. 
Professor Michael Porter, Harvard Business School who coined the term ‘industry cluster’ explains 
that clusters are geographic concentrations of inter-connected companies and institutions in a 
particular field that compete with each other but also co-operate to increase innovation and drive 
economic growth. Clusters encompass an array of inter-linked industries and other entities impor­
tant to competition. Many include, for example, suppliers of specialised inputs such as components, 
machinery, services, and providers of specialised infrastructure. Clusters also often extend down­
stream to channels and customers and laterally to manufacturers of complementary products and 
to companies in industries related by skills, technologies, or common inputs. Finally, many clusters 
include governmental and other institutions - such as universities, standards-setting agencies, 
vocational training providers, and trade associations.
It is easy to see why one of the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation’s five strategic am­
bitions included in the 2015 - 2017 National Action Plan for Jobs is to build world-class clusters in 
key sectors of opportunity. Clusters which follow best in class approaches connect industry, aca­
demia and government to support job creation and economic growth across Ireland.
Some excellent research is being undertaken in Cork relating to industry clustering: in CIT the V-LINC 
research group informs and develops policy recommendations through mapping, visualising and 
analysing the strength of key relationships within Cluster Ecosystems. Their work across Europe 
through the Be Wiser1 project in partnership with Cork County Council allows benchmarking of Irish 
clusters against the best in class. In UCC the Dept. of Economics undertake an annual Analysis of 
National Competitiveness. This cohort of research has sought to, in the first instance; understand 
the different clusters that Cork contains. Thereafter, it seeks to identify future potential economic 
cluster opportunities that can enhance our regional economic growth. 

101
Local Economic And Community Plan
The image above (left) showcases the output linkages from firms based within Systematics’ 
ICT Cluster in Paris, France. The map above (right) shows it@cork’s member firm linkages with 
organisations across Ireland. Source: www.cit.ie/vlinc
1 www.be-wiser.eu
Why is the concept of Clustering important for Cork? 
Through a clear understanding of how Cork is - or can be – ‘clustered’ across key economic sectors, 
we can identify and improve the operational and physical infrastructure required to enhance the 
benefits of clustering in the region. Furthermore, the synergistic benefit of having clusters has the 
advantage of being a magnet for increased FDI investment to the region, which has the knock on 
effect of indigenous firm growth and new innovative start-ups. Existing examples in this area include 
it@Cork and CEIA, who continue to support and develop collaborations in the IT and ICT sectors 
respectively. .
Creating and supporting ‘cluster eco-systems’ in Cork can protect key relationships that exist - as 
well as target the development of new, productive relationships. This will provide the Cork region 
with a key asset in attracting and retaining investment and employment – as inward investment in 
the Cork region will provide investors with access to productive cluster eco-systems. Support for 
strong cluster eco-systems in Cork will lead to innovation, product development and research 
commercialisation to the benefit of both investors and the regional population.
 
Asset Management Goal
To support the sustainable development of internationally focused cluster eco-systems in the 
Cork region
Opportunities
Action 1
Via institutional research, to develop targeted policy actionable at a regional level with a focus 
on developing a sustainable Cluster Strategy for Cork which is cognisant of internationalisation, 
innovation, product development and research commercialisation while protecting the natural 
environmental resources of the County
Action 2
In 2017, to develop a sustainable programme of actions relating to clustering in the Cork region 
that will support the implementation of the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017.
Place
Action 3 
By 2018, in collaboration with the Connectivity Asset Management Group and in order to 
enhance cluster opportunities, to develop a programme of actions to facilitate the creation 
of a sustainable physical network that will enable the creation of interactions and clusters 
within the Cork region

102
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Vision
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Cluster Index that identifies, and commenc­
es the measurement of, key performance indicators for the cluster sector

103
Local Economic And Community Plan
14. EXPORTS MARKETS
While exports could be viewed as a subset of the larger Employment/Income asset, it is appropriate 
to acknowledge that – as is the case with Tourism – it plays a significant role in generating income 
from outside of our own internal economy. Hence exports, like tourism, play an important role in 
growing our overall economy.
Exports play an important role in economic development, influencing our level of economic growth, 
employment and the balance of payments. Competitiveness, quality and value added of exports, 
exchange rates and long-run productivity, are the key determinants of our level of exports. As an 
island nation with a relatively small population, our export sector is key to our collective econom­
ic future.  
Following a prolonged recession, Ireland is today the fastest growing economy in Europe and our 
exporting markets have been the primary driver of this turnaround. In 2007, Ireland’s total goods 
exports amounted to €89.2 billion. Four years later in 2011, amid spiralling unemployment and 
collapsing tax revenues, they had risen to €91.2 billion. The fall-off between 2011 and 2013 was down 
to a once-off contraction in goods exports in 2013, equating to about €4.7 billion, which reduced 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2010 -->
2014-->
Exports & Imports
Billions
Exports             Imports

104
 Local Economic And Community Plan
goods exports down from €91.7 billion to €87 billion. Figures from the Central Statistics Office (CSO) 
show the value of Irish exports rose 2% to €89 billion in 2014, while imports increased by 7% to 
€53.6 billion - the highest level since 2008.
The importance of exports to our overall economy, and to our employment growth specifically, is a 
cross cutting theme of the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017. Growing our export 
markets is a key strategy in growing many of our employment sectors. 
Export Locations
The EU accounted for over €5 billion (58%) of total goods exports in September 2015 of which approx. 
15% went to Belgium (linked to pharmaceutical re-distribution) and approx. 14% to Great Britain. 
The USA was the main non-EU destination accounting for approx. 22% of total exports in September 
2015. The US, Britain, Belgium and Germany accounted for 55% of the value of total goods exports.
Export Goods
Chemicals and related products accounted for 58% of the value of Irish exports in 2014, underscoring 
the role played by large pharmaceutical companies in the Irish and Cork economies. Medical and 
pharmaceutical products increased by €973 million or 5% to €22.2 billion last year. The next biggest 
export category is miscellaneous manufactured articles, which includes commodities, such as, scien­
tific equipment, medical devices, etc., accounting for €11.3 billion in exports. Machinery and transport 
equipment (approx. €10 billion) and food / live animals (approx. 9 billion), are also significant exports. 
Of particular note in recent years is the food sector, rising from just under €7 billion in 2010 to €9.3 
billion in 2014, a 32% increase. The sector was heavily boosted by regaining access to the US and 
Chinese beef markets.

105
Local Economic And Community Plan
Regional Importance of Exports
As can be seen from the above data, our export activities are critical, as follows:
▯
▯
Significant contributor to our overall economic performance
▯
▯
Scope exists to build further those export sectors that have performed well in recent years
▯
▯
Exports support the economic activities of more peripheral rural locations, as well as our 
urban population based economic activities
Having regard to the geographic extent of the Cork region, the development of our exports sector 
base can support the retention of local population within areas peripheral from Metropolitan Cork. 
For example, and as also highlighted by the APJ, the development of agri-food and drink related 
products for export markets within rural economies provides significant scope for assisting in their 
economic sustainability. 
Removal of Barriers via Collaboration
Key to supporting the development of this and other export sectors is, a) continued support for the 
development of individual sectors, b) continued building of connections between export sectors 

106
and foreign markets, and, c) developing transport and logistics connections to facilitate exporters. 
The National Export Campaign (NEC) and National Export Hub (NEH) are part of an initiative lead by 
the Irish Exporters Association and Partners (Government and private) to increase the number of 
Irish businesses exporting for the first time, assist Irish businesses to enter new export markets 
and to support Irish exporters to grow their exports in existing markets.
The Cork local authorities continue to work with key delivery agencies to develop a range of infra­
structure to support the export of goods and also continue to develop relationships with interna­
tional regions in order to facilitate future trade expansion.
 
This LECP plan, and more importantly the process it identifies, seeks to support this work through 
all relevant local agencies and stakeholders. 
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will provide for increased exports from the Cork 
region, by sustainably growing existing exports sectors and developing new export sectors
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan - in collaboration with local authorities, economic agencies 
(such as IDA, EI, etc) and the Irish Exporters Association - to develop a programme of actions 
to continue to assist Cork exporters in identifying international markets for their goods and 
services
Action 2 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to reduce costs – direct and indirect - to Cork 
exporters in accessing international markets with their goods and services
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan - in collaboration with local authorities, educational institutions, 
economic agencies (such as IDA, EI, etc) and the Irish Exporters Association – to develop a 
programme of actions to protect and enhance the existing export sectors operating within 
the Cork region
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan - in collaboration with educational institutions and economic 
agencies (such as IDA, EI, etc) – to seek to identify potential new export sectors within the 
Cork region 
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions relating to the export sector 
that will support the work of the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017

107
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 7
In 2017, to develop a programme of location-based actions that will protect and enhance ex­
isting export sectors operational within the Cork region, with particular reference to safe-guard­
ing and growing rural export-based activities in a manner which is compatible with protecting 
the natural environmental resources of the County
Action 8
By 2018, to identify Cork’s export sector transport and logistics needs, as well as opportunities, 
to maximise access to markets and overall cost competitiveness – in collaboration with the 
work of the Connectivity Asset Management Group
Vision
Action 9
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the overall relative export value of goods 
and services from the Cork region
  
Action 10
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan a decrease in the overall relative costs associated with 
exporting goods and services from the Cork region
Action 11
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish an Export Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, Actions for the export sector.  
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to provide access to ex­
isting regional collaboration agreements for companies, developed by local authorities, 
chambers of commerce third level colleges and incubators

108
15. TOURISM
While tourism can be viewed as a subset of the larger Employment/Income asset, it is appropriate 
to acknowledge that – as is the case with Exports– it plays a significant role in generating income 
from outside of our own internal economy. Hence tourism, like exports, plays an important role in 
growing our overall economy.
Ireland has an exceptional tourism offering and this sector is of critical importance to our economy. 
Ireland’s tourism performance has encountered periods of growth and decline, with wider econom­
ic trends at home and overseas significantly influencing overseas visitor numbers in each decade. 
The period of growth which had occurred from 2002-2007 turned into a sharp decline from 2008, 
fuelled by the worldwide economic crisis, as well as competitiveness issues within Ireland. Since 
2011, in responding to the economic crisis, the Government placed tourism at the centre of its 
economic recovery plan and give a much need boost to the sector by implementing a range of fiscal 
measures - including  lower tax rates and extending visa waivers.
Government’s Long Term Tourism Vision
The Government’s long term vision for the Tourism sector has been mapped out in People, Place 
and Policy: Growing Tourism to 2025. The Government recognises that tourism is one of Ireland’s 
most important economic sectors and has significant potential to play a further role in Ireland’s 
economic renewal.
 
The tourism sector can be considered as similar to our export market, in that it generates income 
from abroad – a key economic consideration for a nation with a relatively small indigenous popu­
lation. The tourism industry in Ireland supports 140,000 jobs within the accommodation and food 
sector alone and, overall, employment in tourism is estimated to be in the region of 200,000.
 
Tourism is Local
Tourism is extremely important in supporting local communities and, in particular, rural communi­
ties. What is sometimes lost by peripheral communities due to travel time from urban centres can 
be offset by building on the natural tourism assets that they have to offer. This places tourism as 
one of the central economic tools for sustaining those communities that are struggling for econom­
ic relevance in our modern economic system. The tourism industry is often labour intensive and 
populated by small businesses and micro-operators, as well as larger tourism-based companies. 
Smaller tourism operators, in particular, allow for monies generated to flow more efficiently into 
local communities, and is directly related to a boost in local spending. For a community with the 
potential to become a tourist destination, there are a huge range of benefits available, including; 
additional employment, increased spending in the local community, economic diversification, in­
frastructure provision, social uplift, environmental protection and increased opportunities for 
residents.

109
Local Economic And Community Plan
In terms of specific targets, by 2025 the Government’s ambition is that overseas tourism revenue 
will reach €5 billion in real terms (i.e. in 2014 prices), with employment in the sector reaching 250,000. 
This, it is anticipated, will be underpinned by 10 million overseas visits per year by 2025, compared 
to 7.6 million in 2014.
Tourism Product in Cork
Cork’s location in the South West region means that it is a direct beneficiary of being a part of a 
popular tourist region. Cork has a rich scenic beauty, a cultural and built heritage, and is also known 
for its strong maritime, sporting and music / language traditions.
 
A study of Ireland’s tourism performance in 2013 showed that Cork is only second to Dublin in terms 
of both overseas and domestic tourism.
Overseas visitors (000s) to counties in 2013 
 County
Total
Britain 
Mainland 
Europe
North 
America 
Other areas
Cork
1,228
485
451
254
99
Cork Revenue
(€ m)  
433 
128
152
119
34
Overseas visitors (000s) to Counties in 2013 (Source: ‘Regional Tourism Performance in 2013’ Fáilte 
Ireland)
Domestic Travel by Irish Residents 
Number of trips (000s) by main county visited, 2010 – 2013
2010
2011
2012
2013
Total 
Domestic – 
Trips  
7,300
7,169
7,031
7,111
Cork
855
837
793
740
Domestic Travel by Irish Residents Number of Trips (000s) by Main County Visited, 2010-2013 
(Source: ‘Regional Tourism Performance in 2013’ Fáilte Ireland)
Policy Context 
Growing Tourism in Cork – A Collective Strategy is a tourism strategy for the Cork region for the 
period 2015-2020 and was recently launched by the Cork Tourism Strategic Taskforce. Following 
extensive research and stakeholder consultation, the focus of this multi-agency taskforce is to target 
actions that will grow domestic and international visitor numbers to 2.8 million, with an associated 
increase in spend in the local economy of €865m.
 
The goals of this comprehensive regional tourism strategy are to:
▯
▯
Increase visitor numbers and duration of stay, and extend seasonal patterns where possible
▯
▯
Increase the revenue value of visits to Cork

110
▯
▯
Increase visitor traffic throughout Cork
▯
▯
Encouraging repeat visits by leveraging Ireland’s Ancient East and the Wild Atlantic Way
These goals will be achieved via 28 actions set within four themes and will be delivered by a range 
of Lead Agencies and supporting bodies. 
The delivery mechanism identified in Growing Tourism in Cork is sophisticated and will entail the 
establishment of Visit Cork Ltd. This company will be appropriately staffed and will develop Service 
Level Agreements with key funding/resourcing agencies This tourism strategy implementation 
framework mirrors the proposed post- LECP structures, in that, it seeks to establish a co-ordinated 
approach to asset enhancement by complimentary delivery agencies.
   
Furthermore, Growing Tourism in Cork has identified a monitoring regime focussed on key tourism 
related metrics. This again complements the development of a Cork asset Index as advocated by 
this LECP process. In many respects, the work already undertaken by Cork Tourism Strategic Taskforce 
is a template for the asset management approach that this LECP is seeking to stimulate.
 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will sustainably grow Cork’s domestic and international 
tourism visitors and increase revenue accruing from same
Opportunity
Action 1
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a sustainable programme of actions that will inform 
and support the work of Visit Cork Ltd., as set out in Growing Tourism in Cork – A Collective 
Strategy 2015 – 2020 in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural environmen­
tal resources of the County 
Place
Action 2
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that will facilitate the 
development of a tourism network for the Cork region, via the alignment of actions of other 
Asset Management Groups and with the work of Visit Cork Ltd
Vision
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Tourism Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, actions for the tourism sector

111
Local Economic And Community Plan
16. COST OF LIVING
Consumer costs are a key part of Ireland’s international competitiveness. High consumer costs lead 
to increased wage demands, which are the most significant cost component for most businesses. 
High wage demands lead to reduced international competitiveness – ultimately impacting on 
job-creation.  They are also a factor in where people choose to live.  
The Cost of Living can be defined as the price of goods and services (food, accommodation, cloth­
ing, fuel, etc.) required for maintaining the basic or minimal standard of living. The cost of living 
varies from place to place and is primarily measured by the Consumer Price index (CPI) which is the 
official measure of inflation in Ireland.
Eurostat’s harmonised consumer price index (HICP) is the most appropriate measure of inflation for 
inter-country comparison. Table 1 contains inflation rates for Ireland and the euro area-17 from 1997 
to 2012.
Table 1: HICP average annual inflation in Ireland and comparator countries: 1997-2012
Country
1997-1998
1999-2007
2008-2012
1997-2012
Ireland
1.7%
3.4%
0.6%
2.3%
Euro area-17
1.3%
2.1%
2.1%
2.0%
Source: Eurostat; Europe Economics’ calculations
There has been some disparity in inflation trends between Ireland and the euro area during the 
periods reviewed.  Since the recession, inflation in Ireland has fallen to 0.6% per annum compared 
with euro area-17 annual inflation of 2.1%.  This trend has continued into 2013 and 2014 with Irish 
inflation (average 0.4%) continuing to remain below the euro area average.
Our falling rate of inflation has been a contributory factor in benefiting our international compet­
itiveness and our ranking as a country in this regard has improved from 24th in 2011 to 16th in 2015 
based on the IMD Competitiveness rankings.
Although Cost of Living data is primarily gathered at a national level through the CPI, evidence exists 
that Cork has certain competitive advantages over Dublin in terms of cost of living.  
There are significant cost and other savings to employees, principally cheaper rent (30% plus), lower 
property purchase costs, lower childcare costs (10% lower) and less time spent travelling to work 
and less congestion e.g. 60% of Cork residents reach work within 30 minutes against 48% in Dublin 
(Census 2011).  Notwithstanding that salaries are 10% less in Cork, a PWC Report on Key Differenti­
ators for Companies Locating in Cork (July 2015) estimated that a working couple’s net income is 8% 
higher in Cork (or by more than €3,220) after the key costs of living costs (rent and childcare) have 

112
been met, based on a presented example.   It determined that a cost of living indicator is 23% lower 
in Cork based on childcare and rental costs only.
  
The Quality of Life Survey carried out as part of this plan reinforces this narrative, as the majority 
(74%) indicate they believe their housing costs are affordable while more than half of Cork County 
Residents (53%) indicate that they have enough money to meet their household’s basic costs.
Securing Cork’s Competitiveness
Ireland’s cost base has improved across a range of metrics since 2009, making Irish firms more 
competitive internationally and making Ireland a more attractive location for firms locate in.
While there are many external international factors that have the potential to affect our competi­
tiveness, it is prudent to minimise those costs that we ourselves primarily have of control over.
Concerted efforts and progress continues to be made at the national level to increase our compet­
itiveness through the work of the National Competitiveness Council in recommending policy actions 
to enhance Ireland’s competitive position.
At a local level co-operation and collaboration between all stakeholders in relation to the provision 
of goods and services has the potential to create additional efficiencies that benefit the consumer, 
reduce the cost of living and encourage additional investment.  There exists a range of areas where 
intervention is possible.  
For example, at the strategic spatial planning level it is possible to make Cork function more effi­
ciently – and therefore, cheaper to operate. By locating and connecting residential, employment, 
health, education, leisure, etc. facilities we can make a place that is cost effective and environmen­
tally sustainable.
At the personal consumption level, we can provide choice for residents in order to allow for cost 
efficiencies. An important example of this relates to housing. By providing housing choice – in terms 
of tenure, type, location and size, we will facilitate residents (existing and future) to make cost ef­
fective choices that facilitate their personal lifestyle choices. Considering that on average households 
spend in excess of 20% of their disposable income on their housing needs, choice and efficiencies 
in this sector are critical to Cork’s competitiveness – and hence, our ability to retain and attract 
population.  
Cost of Living is a cross-cutting measure that is informed by many of the key assets listed in this 
plan. Having identified Cork’s key socio-economic assets, it is important to measure our performance 
in each area – and with particular reference to economic cost. This plan recommends that Cork’s 
high performance in the area of cost of living is protected, monitored and enhanced where possible. 
Furthermore, it is important to recognise that some sections of Cork society are struggling to meet 
the basic costs of living. This plan seeks to identify additional assets – such as, supports, education, 
access, employment, etc – to assist in providing the opportunity for all residents to be capable of 
meeting their living costs.
Asset Management Goal
To minimise the cost of living for residents of Cork, benchmarked nationally and internationally

113
Local Economic And Community Plan
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2016, to develop a programme of actions that will increase efficiencies and reduce costs 
across the range of goods and services provided within Cork, achieving during the lifetime of 
this plan a reduction in the overall cost of living for resident’s (index linked to inflation). 
Place
Action 2
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions that will target reductions in the costs to Cork 
residents of the three principle disposable income expenditures - housing, transport and food
Action 3
In 2016, to develop a Cork Cost of Living Survey that will monitor the cost of access by residents 
to all key services that contribute to Cork’s cost of living competitiveness.  
Vision
Action 4
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding cost 
of living reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District.
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Cost of Living Index that identifies, and 
commences the measurement of, Actions relating to cost of living within the Cork region  

114
17. CORK AIRPORT
As stated in the section on Connectivity herein, places that allow for convenient and efficient 
transport of people, materials and goods from the centres of production tend to be where wealth 
is created. Historically, transportation centred on regional, national and limited international dis­
tribution. However, in our modern global economy the movement of people and goods internation­
ally is the norm. In particular for Ireland, having regard to our relatively small indigenous population, 
our significant reliance on foreign investment, exports and tourism, international connectivity is a 
critical lifeline for our economic growth.
Only two methods of international transport are available to us from our island – by sea and by air. 
While marine transport remains the primary conduit for our international bulk goods distribution, 
air transport is key to the movement of people to and from Ireland – with over 80% of all passenger 
movements into and out of Ireland by air. As discussed throughout this plan, the importance of an 
efficient transportation network that connects the local, regional, national and international move­
ment of people is a critical competitive asset for the Cork region. 
National Aviation Policy 
The National Aviation Policy plots a pathway to enable the Irish aviation industry to build on its 
existing strong reputation to compete effectively in the growing global market place.
 
Specifically, the principal goals of this policy are: 
▯
▯
To enhance Ireland’s connectivity by ensuring safe, secure and competitive access responsive 
to the needs of business, tourism and consumers;
▯
▯
To foster the growth of aviation enterprise in Ireland to support job creation and position 
Ireland as a recognised global leader in aviation; and,
▯
▯
To maximise the contribution of the aviation sector to Ireland’s economic growth and devel­
opment.
Direct transportation routes between Ireland and international markets are centrally important to 
the achievement to the above aims and those set out in the Government Trade, Tourism and Invest­
ment Strategy, as reviewed in February 2014. Within this context, central government is confident 
that the Irish airport network is well placed to grow its share of global passenger traffic over the 
next decade. By 2020, it expects that Irish airports will throughput approx. 33 million passengers 
per annum, up from 25 million passengers in 2013.
As an island nation, aviation infrastructure is of strategic importance to us and needs to reflect 
also the regional spatial dimensions of our national spatial and economic strategies.

115
Local Economic And Community Plan
Regional Role Cork Airport 
Cork Airport has welcomed the publication of the Government’s first National Aviation Policy which 
outlines the Government’s commitment to work with Cork Airport to exploit all opportunities for 
growth and to continue to develop the network of services from Cork Airport. 
The new national policy states that Cork Airport “has a strategic role in serving the connectivity 
needs of the city and its hinterland”  and adds that the airport, “working with local stakeholders 
and with the necessary local and hinterland support, is encouraged to exploit all opportunities for 
growth, and to continue to develop its network of services”. 
The 2015 Economic Impact Study of Cork Airport reinforces the crucial role that Cork Airport plays 
in the economy of the South of Ireland. This study found that Cork Airport is fundamental to the 
growth of the local economy and contributes €727 million to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) via direct, 
indirect, induced and catalytic influences – equating to 2.2% of the total South West regional economy. 
The airport’s importance to the region is reflected in the fact that it supports or facilitates almost 
11,000 regional jobs. Various economic studies show that there is a close connection between airports 
and regional development. The association between airport passengers and both metropolitan 
population growth and employment growth is established. There are also significant linkages 
between airport passenger activities and regional economic output, income and wages, high tech 
industry growth, levels of innovation, human capital levels and the concentration of knowledge, 
professional and creative class workforce within a region. Within the context of the key Cork assets 
identified in this plan, Cork airport plays a critical role in facilitating the protection and enhancement 
of many assets, including; population size, age-dependency ratio, tourism, employment, export 
markets, connectivity, research and innovation, etc. Furthermore, Cork Airport (and the aviation 
sector generally) is an important regional employer and the airport campus is itself is an emerging 
employment location.  
Special Local Area Plan (SLAP)
A Special Local Area Plan (SLAP) for Cork Airport has been prepared by Cork County Council with the 
purpose of facilitating the development of Cork Airport by providing for, and where necessary, 
protecting land for the future operation and development needs of the Airport, looking forward to 
the year 2040. This Special Local Area Plan has identified the future aviation needs and associated 
infrastructural requirements of Cork Airport in the long term and specifies policies and objectives 
to safeguard the continuing growth of the Airport as a key economic driver for the region.
Future Cork Airport
As highlighted above, Cork Airport is a critical asset to the future of Cork, particularly if a Cork based 
region is to; achieve economic growth, provide access by residents to socio-economic opportunities 
and absorb a reasonable proportion of future projected national population growth. Hence, an 
economically viable airport that is plugged into a regional transportation network is critical if we 
are to achieve our regional economic and social potential.
    
Various economic studies, including those of the Airports Council International (ACI), highlight the 
recent income trends of airports globally. The financial models that underpin modern airports are 

116
changing fundamentally, moving from direct airline and passenger related charges to non-direct 
income sources. In fact, the global average for direct funding from airlines and passengers is now 
below 50% and airports are becoming more reliant on in-direct incomes to maintain competitiveness.
Within this emerging economic narrative, we are required to consider potential alternative income 
streams from those direct charges that have historically supported Cork Airport. While Cork Airport 
Authority in recent years has expanded its strategic vision to take account of this dynamic funding 
environment, the importance of Cork Airport to our collective socio-economic well-being requires 
all stakeholders to consider policy options that will place Cork Airport on a sustainable financial 
trajectory – facilitating route and frequency expansion, to match our regional ambitions.
In addition, it is recognised that there is the need to safeguard the current role of the airport in 
terms of operation, safety and technical needs. This will be a key factor in attracting FDI and further 
capitalising on international connections into the future.
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will protect and enhance Cork Airport’s key role in the 
economic and social development of the Cork region in a manner which is compatible with 
protecting the natural environmental resources of the County 
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to expand the revenue base of Cork Airport in order 
to underpin its future growth in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural 
environmental resources of the County.
Action 2
During the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration with the Tourism and Employment Income 
Asset Management Groups, to develop a programme of actions to progress enhanced air 
services to locations that are most critical to Cork’s future economic vision
Place
Action 3
In 2017, to engage with key transport stakeholders to develop a programme of actions to 
enhance transport connectivity between Cork Airport campus and the Metropolitan Cork 
transport network, with particular emphasis on public transport connectivity
Action 4
In 2017, to engage with the local authorities and key stakeholders to develop a programme 
of actions to progress the objectives set out in the Special Local Area Plan for Cork Airport 
in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources of the County
Vision
Action 5
Within the lifetime of this plan, and in conjunction with the Department of Transport Tourism 
and Sport, to develop and monitor a Passenger Index for Cork Airport

117
Local Economic And Community Plan
18. CORK HARBOUR
Cork Harbour is a large natural harbour of significant importance to the Cork region. It is strategi­
cally located in close proximity to important internationally shipping routes, directly links Ireland’s 
southeast coast with Europe, as well as being in close proximity to Cork city and its urban hinterland. 
Cork Harbour has a critical economic, social and ecological influence on the Cork region.
   
The Harbour is one of the key natural assets that the Cork region has at its disposal. It is one of the 
largest natural harbours in the world and its sheltered coastal environment provides for a diverse 
natural heritage that accommodates a wide range of activities and uses.
The Harbour towns are generally well connected by road (e.g. the N25 on the north side of the 
Harbour, and the N28 on the south side of the Harbour) and a rail service connects Cork to Cobh. 
There are proposals to develop water taxi services, to link the Lower Harbour with the urban Cork.
Strategic and Economic
Port operations and activities are dispersed throughout the harbour, facilitating a number of key 
regional activities, as follows:
▯
▯
Port of Cork is the premier port on Ireland’s south coast offering sheltered deepwater facili­
ties close to the main shipping lanes to Northern Europe, the Mediterranean and North Ameri­
ca
▯
▯
Destination for passenger ferries and cruise liners
▯
▯
Home for a wide range of marine leisure and sailing activities
▯
▯
Home to the Irish Maritime and Energy Resource Cluster (IMERC), a world class cluster of 
ocean energy expertise 
▯
▯
Home to a number of off-shore exploration companies
▯
▯
Home to three education, training & research centres of excellence for the marine environ­
ment, namely the National Maritime College of Ireland, the MaREI centre (Marine Renewable 
Energy Ireland) and the Halpin Centre
▯
▯
Home to eight out of ten of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies
Environmental
Cork Harbour is a natural, sheltered harbour environment that is home to a diverse range of natural 
habitats and species. It is:
▯
▯
One of the finest natural harbour’s in the world
▯
▯
A large, sheltered harbour with many river estuaries including the Rivers Lee, Owenacurra and 

118
Douglas
▯
▯
The harbour’s navigation channel is maintained at approx. 11m depth to facilitate shipping 
and marine transport
▯
▯
Designated as a Ramsar wetland site of international importance and a Special Protected 
Area because of its ornithological significance
Social and Cultural
Cork Harbour is a natural amenity that has played a significant role in the establishment and de­
velopment of the Cork region, and continues to be:
▯
▯
Home to a number of residential communities
▯
▯
A significant natural public amenity
▯
▯
Known for being the last port of call for the Titanic
▯
▯
Home to three historic military installations, Spike Island & Fort Camden (Dún Meagher), both 
open to the public, and Fort Carlisle (Dún Daibhís)
▯
▯
Home to five Martello Towers dating to the Napoleanic era
▯
▯
Home to the oldest yacht club in the world, the RCYC, founded in 1720 as ‘The Water Club of 
the Harbour of Cork’
Port of Cork
The Port of Cork Company is one of only two Irish ports, the other being Dublin, capable of handling 
traffic across all five principal traffic modes (LoLo, RoRo, Break Bulk, Dry Bulk and Liquid Bulk). It 
handles approx. 19% of all seaborne trade in the State. It is second only to Dublin in its importance 
in the LoLo sector, handling around 21% of all LoLo traffic in the State (IMDO, 2012a).  The Port has 
four distinct public facilities: City Quays, Tivoli Industrial and Dock Estate, Ringaskiddy Deepwater 
and Ferry Terminals, and, Cobh Cruise Terminal.
 In 2012 the total traffic in terms of volume amounted to in excess of 9 million tonnes. The company 
has an ongoing investment programme in port facilities and handling equipment, having invested 
€103 since its incorporation in 1997. In recent years the Port has invested in improvements to the 
cruise facilities in Cobh and in 2012, the Port of Cork welcomed 57 cruise liners, carrying in excess 
of 100,000 passengers and crew to the region.
Defence
Cork Harbour continues to be influenced by naval activities and the Irish Naval Headquarters (NHQ) 
is co-located with Naval Operations and Naval Support Commands on Haulbowline Island in Cork 
Harbour. 
The Naval Service is tasked with a variety of roles including defending territorial seas, deterring 
intrusive or aggressive acts, conducting maritime surveillance, maintaining an armed naval presence, 
ensuring right of passage, protecting marine assets, countering port blockades; people or arms 
smuggling, illegal drugs interdiction, and providing the primary diving team in the State. 

119
Local Economic And Community Plan
Education & Research
Cork Harbour has developed into a hub for education and research which is recognised through the 
development of four key maritime facilities:
▯
▯
The National Maritime College of Ireland
▯
▯
Irish Maritime & Energy Resource Cluster (IMERC)
▯
▯
The Beaufort Centre
▯
▯
The Halpin Centre
With physical links to Cork Harbour and operational links to key educational institutes regionally, 
these educational and research facilities will play an important future role in expanding the breadth 
of coastal / marine activities and contributing to the growth of Cork’s economic outputs. 
Heritage & Tourism
Cork Harbour is also a major asset in terms of tourism, heritage and marine leisure activities and 
is extremely important from a tourist and economic development perspective. The harbour is es­
sential to Cork’s identity and history. It has been used for generations by Cork people for relaxation 
and leisure activities. Angling, sailing, rowing and water skiing are all popular activities around the 
harbour. The harbour lies at the heart of Cork’s maritime heritage and plays a pivotal role in the 
promotion of maritime tourism.
 
Future Harbour
Cork County Council, in whose jurisdiction most of the Harbour lies, has acquired significant under­
stand of the complexities and potential that the Harbour area presents – via its involvement with 
the Bantry Bay Coastal Zone Charter, the COREPOINT Project, the IMCORE Project and the Cork Harbour 
Study, as well as site specific projects such as the Spike Island Masterplan and similar.
 
Cork City Council manages the intersection of the Upper Harbour with Cork City, an area identified 
as key for the future expansion of the city’s built form. This future expansion will be facilitated by 
the relocation within the Harbour of existing users adjacent to the city centre.
Hence, the need for a holistic management approach to the harbour is understood, one that is 
sensitive to the economic, environmental, social and cultural needs of this integrated area. In terms 
of public infrastructure provision, the upgrading of the N28 route to Ringaskiddy is important in 
this regard.
Asset Management Goal
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will maximise the regional socio-economic potential 
of Cork Harbour by aligning the economic, environmental, social and cultural needs of this 
integrated area in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural environmental 
resources of the harbour area
Opportunity
Action 1 >Continued Overleaf

120
 Local Economic And Community Plan
By 2018, to draft a SWOT analysis of Cork Harbour and its immediate hinterland, set within 
the context of the NPF and RSES outcomes
Action 2
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to protect and enhance 
the economic, cultural and social capacities of the Cork harbour area in a manner which is 
compatible with protecting the natural environmental resources of the harbour
Action 3
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to facilitate the relocation 
of industries from the Upper Harbour area in a manner which is compatible with protecting 
the natural environmental resources of the harbour and which complies with the Habitats and 
Birds Directives
Place
Action 4
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to protect and enhance 
the natural and built environment of the Cork harbour area
Action 5
Within the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration with the Connectivity Assets Management 
Group, to develop a programme of actions to enhance connectivity between the Cork Harbour 
area and Metropolitan Cork and, in particular, enhancing public transport and water-based 
connections in a manner which is compatible with protecting the natural environmental re­
sources of the harbour and which complies with the Habitats and Birds Directives
Vision
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Harbour Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, permanent Actions for Cork Harbour.  

121
Local Economic And Community Plan
19. HEALTH
Introduction
Good physical and mental health is one of the cornerstones of a well functioning modern society. 
Without one’s health, a person may struggle to accomplish the simple activities of daily life, as well 
limiting our ability to pursue our life interests. Our collective health and well-being is also one of 
our most valuable economic resources. A healthy population is an essential requirement for a vibrant 
economy, allowing people to fulfil their potential and to sustain jobs which are beneficial to the 
overall quality of life of the region.
The importance of our health is reflected in the results of the Cork Quality of Life Survey undertak­
en as part of this project. Not surprisingly, residents of Cork identified their physical and mental 
health as among the most important aspects of their lives.
 
Ireland’s Health Vision
Healthy Ireland: A Framework for Improved Health and Well-being 2013 -2025 (Dept. of Health) de­
scribes our health vision as:
Health Factors	
Internationally, a range of indices have been developed to assess our collective health. These in­
dicators point to what action areas are critical in addressing our future health. These include:
 
Behaviours	
	
       Education		
	
Income	
	
Social Supports  
Health Services 	
       Genetics	 	
	
Gender	
	
Physical  Environment
All of the above considerations have an impact on our overall health and, clearly, collaboration by 
a range of agencies is required to deliver a holistic approach to our health management.
 
Framework for Change
The Irish government has embarked on a journey of improving the physical and mental well-being 
of the nation. This journey is based upon 4 Key Goals that are deemed fundamental to improving a 
person’s life; economic status, education, housing, and, the physical environment in which people 
live and work. 
A Healthy Ireland, where everyone can enjoy physical and 
mental health and wellbeing to their full potential, where 
wellbeing is valued and supported at every level of society and 
is everyone’s responsibility

122
The government recognises that in order to improve health and well-being there needs to be a 
collaborative approach from all sectors of society, including, policy makers, delivery agencies, 
communities and - most importantly - individuals. It is recognised that there needs to be a cultur­
al change in relation to residents’ health and well-being, particularly their perceptions around 
behaviours. Policy initiatives seek to encourage and educate individuals to take responsibility for 
their own health, but also supported by the environment that surrounds them - physical, natural, 
work and community.
The Governments framework to improve Ireland’s health and well-being is designed around 4 High 
Level Goals and will be implemented through 64 detailed actions.
The Government’s High Level goals for Health & Well-being are:
	
Goal 1: 	
Increase the proportion of people who are healthy at all stages of life
	
Goal 2: 	
Reduce health inequalities
	
Goal 3: 	
Protect the public from threats to health and well-being
	
Goal 4: 	
Create an environment where every individual and sector of society can
           		
	
play their part in achieving a healthy Ireland
Cork Health
In overall terms, Cork residents’ health is above the national average. However, while economic and 
service analysis can be useful on a collective basis, we do not engage with good health collective­
ly - but as individuals.
 
Having regard to the 2011 Census for Cork County:
▯
▯
Approx. 47,274 persons have a disability, of whom 15,919, representing 33.7 % of the total, are 
aged 65 years and over. 
▯
▯
17,106 persons (6,750 males and 10,356 females) provide regular unpaid personal help for a 
friend or family member with a long-term illness, health problem or disability. 21.4% of these 
provide care for more than 6 hours per day.
▯
▯
361,162 persons state they are in very good or good health, representing 90.3% of total per­
sons. This compares to 88.3% of total persons nationally. 
▯
▯
4,461 persons state they are in bad or very bad health, representing 1.1% of total persons. 
Again this compares with 1.5% of total persons nationally.
These figures are reflected in the Cork Quality of Life Survey, where 88% of residents stated that 
they considered their overall health as being very good. However, the above figures also indicate 
that there are approx.  50,000 residents – approx. 12.5% of our overall population – living with a 
disability, living with illness, or, providing significant unpaid care for another person. 
Implementing Change 
The Government envisages that the Healthy Ireland Framework will be implemented through tar­
geted actions grouped into six broad themes:

123
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
Governance and Policy
▯
▯
Partnerships and Cross-Sectoral Work
▯
▯
Empowering People and Communities
▯
▯
Health and Health Reform
▯
▯
Research and Evidence
▯
▯
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation
The guiding principles for implementation are to provide improved governance and leadership at a 
national level and the Healthy Ireland Framework has the support of all Government Departments. 
Local Partnerships
Reflecting the national Government’s strategic approach, local co-ordination and partnerships are 
central to removing barriers for residents who are, or will be, faced by illness or disability – direct­
ly or indirectly. Many such local partnerships are already in place between stakeholders and deliv­
ery agencies, and, this LECP process seeks to build upon those existing relationships. Collaboration 
occurs in many sectors, such as, health promotion, education, transport, physical environment, etc. 
and involves a variety of stakeholders and delivery agencies.
 
Many health related initiative, aimed at short and long term impacts, require co-ordinated and timed 
actions by a range of delivery agencies. Additionally, many actions undertaken in non-health related 
areas impact upon our health – positively or negatively.
  
Developing performance indicators for the health sector services is a broad undertaking, reflecting 
the many facets of our physical and mental health, such as; primary care, acute care, palliative care, 
mental health care, social care, etc. This plan, as a strategic document that seeks to stimulate further 
collective outputs, focuses initially on our overall health and well-being. For example, within Cork 
(and nationally) healthy eating and its benefits are promoted via a wide range of public and private 
agencies, with further collaborations possible. In the UK, Local Government Declarations on Healthy 
Weight have been adopted, with multi-agency support. As just one example of potential future 
collaborations within the health sector, local authorities, local development companies and other 
public / private bodies potentially could adopt healthy eating policies and roll such an initiative 
out to other organisations also.
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance the physical and mental health and well-be­
ing of Cork residents. 
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, building upon existing collaborative initiatives, to develop a guide inter-agency action 
in improving the health and well-being, physical and mental, of residents 

124
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 5
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing health related facilities and to develop a system of 
on-going monitoring
Action 6
In 2017, in collaboration with the Urban Cork, Rural Cork and Community Asset Management 
Groups, to develop a programme of actions to enhance the role that our physical and 
natural environments can play in facilitating a healthy region
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, support Actions 32-37 of the National Physical Activity Plan 
to facilitate people in choosing active travel as an everyday mode of transport. 
Vision
Action 8
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding 
our overall health reported to the National Census Survey by residents within each 
Municipal District.
Action 9
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding 
our overall health reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each 
Municipal District.
Action 10
In 2017, having regard to existing health surveys and indicators, to identify a programme 
of actions to establish a Cork Health Index that will measure and monitor the health of 
residents within the Cork region
Action 2 By 2018, to develop a programme of actions to remove barriers for residents in 
accessing health services, leading to equality of opportunity in the health sector for all 
residents
Action 3
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to identify and address strategic health threats 
to residents 
Action 4
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to empower individuals and communities in con­
tributing to the creation of a healthy region

125
Local Economic And Community Plan
20. FAMILY & HOME LIFE
The United Nations recognizes the family as the basic unit of society.  Families have been transformed 
over the last number of decades as a result of changes to their structure, global trends in migration, 
the phenomenon of demographic ageing and the impacts of globalization.  The United Nations 
states that, ‘These dynamic social forces have had a manifest impact on the capacities of families 
to perform such functions as the socialization of children and care giving for their younger and older 
members.’
Family and Home Life was identified as the most important asset to residents of Cork County in the 
Quality of Life Survey undertaken as part of the LECP public consultation process.  The effectiveness 
of our Family and Home Life contributes to both the development of our human capital (see section 
on Human Capital herein), as well as our economic potential.
Our experiences learned through home life and during our formative years play a central role in 
our later endeavours as adults.  The success, or otherwise, we have as a society begins for most at 
home. Conversely, our success – in the widest sense of the word – is often demonstrated in our 
creation of a new home life as adults. Hence, Home and Family Life is both a key tool for, as well as 
a key output of, a successful society – whatever form that family or home life may take.
Home
While we are all affected and shaped by our wider communities and experiences, as the place where 
we live permanently, our homes have a critical role in shaping our development and potential. 
Problems that affect even one member of a family can have a significant influence, including in how 
people view and live their lives. Conversely, a positive home environment is identified as a core 
foundation for the fulfilling of our potential, providing us with the core life skills required for later 
life. 
Learning is a complex process, beginning at birth and continuing throughout life. Parents are the 
first teachers and role models for their children and, therefore, have a strong influence on their 
learning. Yet, studies continue to show that many parents are not aware of the importance they 
play in their child’s education and have a limited understanding of their role in their children’s 
learning (Department of Children and Youth Affairs).
Our home life is also a key environment for testing and learning values (see also Social Values and 
Community sections herein). Ireland has a reputation of having positive societal values and this 
learning also emerged during the Quality of Life Survey undertaken for this project. Family and Home 
Life, Community and Friendships, were all rated highly as those things that we collectively value 
most. However, international experience indicates that increased social and economic inequality 
undermines our collective community values.

126
Inter-Departmental Co-Ordination
The national policy focus on family and home life is based on an inter-departmental approach. 
Various government departments develop and implement national policy and actions, with the 
Department of Children and Youth Affairs focussing on harmonising policy issues that affect children 
in areas such as early childhood care, education, youth justice, child welfare, child protection, 
children and young people’s participation, research on children and young people, youth work and 
cross-cutting initiatives for children.
The 2015 State of the Nation’s Children report is a temperature reading of the nation’s children, 
identifying a range of supports (both formal and informal) including school, housing, antenatal care, 
immunisation and economic. Data is drawn from a wide range of sources and reflects the varied 
and often complex subject that is family life.
The Child and Family Agency (Tusla) was established on the 1st January 2014 and is now the dedi­
cated state agency responsible for improving well-being and outcomes for children. It represents 
the most comprehensive reform of child protection, early intervention and family support services 
ever undertaken in Ireland.
Government policy is influenced by the significant volume of international research undertaken in 
this subject area over recent decades, with several strands of research producing compelling evidence 
justifying a focus on the family - with a particular emphasis on early years. Key research findings 
include:
▯
Families and parents are critical to children’s attainment. Parental involvement in their child’s
literacy practices positively affects children’s academic performance and is a more powerful
force for academic success than other family background variables, such as social class, fami­
ly size and level of parental education.
▯
The home is crucial. Parents have the greatest influence on the achievement of young people
through supporting their learning in the home rather than supporting activities in school.
Early intervention is vital. The earlier parents become involved in their children’s literacy prac­
tices, the more profound the results and the longer-lasting the effects.
▯
Children learn long before they enter formal education.
▯
Parents are a child’s first educator. A child’s family and home environment has a strong im­
pact on his/her language and literacy development and educational achievement.
▯
This impact is stronger during the child’s early years but continues throughout their school
years.
Holistic Approach
Many background variables affect family and home environment (such as socio-economic status, 
level of parental education, family size, etc.) but parental attitudes and behaviour, especially parents’ 
involvement in home learning activities, can be crucial to children’s achievement and can overcome 
the influences of other factors.
Hence, any actions aiming to improve educational standards cannot be limited to formal educa­
tional settings, where children spend only a small proportion of their time. On the contrary, it needs 

127
Local Economic And Community Plan
to embrace the family as a whole and include parents as partners in their children’s education from 
the very beginning of their children’s lives. 
Furthermore, the 2011 report Family Structure in Ireland by the ESRI and UCD, noted that one-in-three 
families in Ireland departs from the traditional model of a married couple both of whom are in their 
first marriage. One-in-four children under 21 years of age lived in a family which at that time of the 
study did not conform to this model.
Additionally, while children are often prioritized on the topic of family, the needs of other family or 
household members also require consideration. Grandparents, for example, are now the most 
prevalent (42%) source of childcare for working parents (Irish Times/Ipsos MRBI Family Values poll 
2015 ). The needs of the elderly, as set out in strategy documents such as the National Positive 
Ageing Strategy recognize the importance of family from the perspective of the elderly.
Cost of Living
As outlined in the section on Cost of Living herein, costs of accessing services and goods is critical 
to our long term economic competitiveness. However, cost of living is crucial to our overall quality 
of life and our ability to nurture the potential of future generations. 
For example, the cost of living in most instances now requires that both parents need to work to 
some extent. However, the cost of formal childcare is a significant burden on young families – and 
particularly at a point in the life cycle that research indicates is critical in assisting children to fulfil 
their potential (economic, as well as social). Additionally, cost of accessing suitable family homes, 
education, transport, food, etc. have a significant limiting influence on our family-based choices. 
This has a long term social and economic impact on our society. 
Barriers
While family life is very important to us personally, socially and economically, it must be acknowl­
edged that many real barriers exist that prevent families from fulfilling their potential. It is not 
reasonable to state that all Cork residents have the same access to opportunities, for a variety of 
personal, social, financial and economic reasons. While we cannot ensure equality of outcome for 
all, as a society we should strive for equality of opportunity for all.
Cost and Benefits
Having regard to the complexities of how we, as individuals, are formed, it is difficult to put a precise 
single cost on our not achieving our full social and economic potential. Many studies exist that 
explore the significant long terms costs of particular behaviours, negative and positive; such as, 
alcoholism, smoking, poor diet, high educational attainment, well formed personal relationships, 
etc. However, a common theme in all studies reflects that early intervention maximises cost ben­
efits and the central role that parents play in this early intervention.
Access to Services
For those families that are struggling with some facets of their collective lives, it is critical that 

128
access to - and availability of - support resources is made possible.  Family support services exist 
for families and individuals who need help, recognising that by maximising the delivery of individ­
ual potential is in our collective interests.  The main focus of these services is on prevention and 
early intervention aiming to promote and protect the health, well-being and rights of all children, 
young people and their families.
However, while priority must certainly be given to those families most in need of supports, access 
to services for all families is a central requirement of a high functioning society. As discussed above, 
the removal of barriers linked to the cost and ease of forming a family will provide greater choice 
and opportunities to those families (housing, education, work, etc.).  
Realigning the Conversation
Having regard to international socio-economic research around the topic of family, as well as lis­
tening to the residents of Cork as they identify Family and Home Life as a key asset that is valued, 
it is worth pausing to consider how central is the creation of positive family environments to our 
collective thought process. 
If human capital is the basic ingredient for our future communities and economic performance, and 
if family and home life is the environment that significantly influences whether we reach our po­
tential, it would appear that investment in supporting high quality family outcomes is a smart long 
term strategy.
As an ambitious region that seeks to remove barriers to opportunities, rather than viewing the 
family unit as just requiring support in certain difficult circumstance, perhaps we should view family 
life as a core social and economic regional asset – and a core conduit for the realisation of our 
collective ambition.
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions which support Family and Home Life as a key conduit for the 
development of Human Capital and as an important destination for our collective life endeav­
ors. 
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, in collaboration with the Education Asset Management Group, to develop a programme 
of actions to continue to promote and enhance the key role played by parents / guardians in 
terms of early intervention regarding education and life skills 
Action 2
By 2018, in collaboration with the Cost of Living Asset Management Group, to develop a pro­
gramme of actions to reduce the financial costs associated with Family and Home Life

129
Local Economic And Community Plan
Action 3
In 2017, in collaboration with the Employment Asset Management Group, to develop a pro­
gramme of actions to facilitate engagement with employment that is compatible with a healthy 
and productive Family and Home Life
Action 4
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to remove barriers for families in accessing support 
services
Place
Action 5
By 2018, inform the outputs of the Rural Cork, Urban Cork, Social Activities and Housing Asset 
Management Groups, by developing a programme of actions that will lead to the provision of 
housing and public realm that facilitates the needs of Family and Home Life
Action 6
By 2018, inform the outputs of the Connectivity and Physical Infrastructure Asset Management 
Groups, by developing a programme of actions that will lead to the provision of transport that 
facilitates the needs of Family and Home Life
Vision
Action 7
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding Family 
and Home Life reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal 
District.
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Family and Home Life Index to monitor and measure 
the Actions of Cork’s Family and Home Life environment

130
 Local Economic And Community Plan
21. SOCIAL INCLUSION
It is a High Level Goal of this process to ensure that every Cork resident is valued equally. By valuing 
every resident equally, we recognise that every resident has the potential to contribute positively 
to our collective social and economic well-being.
Social exclusion can be defined as the experience of social, cultural and economic inequalities. It 
is the process whereby certain individuals, groups or communities are pushed from the centre of 
society and are unable to participate fully - due to factors such as, poverty, inadequate education, 
unequal healthcare, etc.  Poverty and social exclusion are inextricably linked. 
Within the personal and social context, social exclusion is unfair. From an economic perspective, 
an inability to fulfil one’s economic potential is both unfair and inefficient.   
During the first decade of this century Ireland made significant progress on the issue of poverty, 
driven by increases in employment and social welfare payments. The rate of poverty significantly 
declined between 2001 and 2009, but rose again following our financial crisis. 
When we look at Ireland’s figures for those at risk of poverty and exclusion (the combined indicator 
used in the Europe 2020 Strategy), we have gone from 23.1% in 2007 to 29.4% in 2011, representing 
1.3 million people by 2011. This is one of the highest rates of poverty or social exclusion in the EU.
Source: Eurostat

131
Local Economic And Community Plan
Socially  Excluded
People who are socially excluded are often referred to as target groups, as they are the groups 
towards whom the Government targets its social inclusion measures. These population cohorts are 
varied, but generally include:
▯
Lone parents (an individual who is living in a single adult household and raising de­
pendent children and/or young people on their own. A lone parent may be a single
parent or someone who is separated, divorced or widowed);
▯
New communities including migrants experiencing socio-economic disadvantage, refu­
gees and asylum seekers who are from other EU member states or outside the EU and
are resident/living in Ireland;
▯
People with disabilities, people with mental health challenges, and people with re­
duced mobility;
▯
Older people;
▯
Travellers;
▯
Homeless people or people at risk of housing exclusion;
▯
Unemployed people;
▯
Young people aged 15-24 years and not in employment, education or training (NEETs);
▯
Low income workers/households (people or households are considered to be at risk of
poverty when their income is less than a particular threshold);
▯
Specific groups within a disadvantaged area who may be marginalised and experience
social exclusion on the basis of a particular issue e.g. prisoners/ex-prisoners; drug/al­
cohol mis-users; homeless people; lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.
These groups have differing reasons for their inability to fully participate in society, however, they 
are united in one characteristic; all have barriers that require to be removed in order to reach their 
full life’s potential. 
Targets for Social Inclusion
The National Reform Programme goal regarding consistent poverty is:
The Irish Government is committed to a coherent strategy for social inclusion through the Nation­
al Action Plan for Social Inclusion (NAP Inclusion).  This adopts a lifecycle approach which places 
the individual at the centre of policy development and delivery.  The NAP Inclusion sets out a 
wide-ranging and comprehensive programme of action to address poverty and social exclusion. It 
is recognised that the challenges now are very different to when this plan was drawn up in 2007 
To reduce the number experiencing consistent poverty to 4% by 
2016 (interim target) and to 2% or less by 2020, from the 2010 
baseline rate of 6.3%. 

132
and the plan is due to be reviewed in 2017.
Cross-cutting Measures and Linkages 
A joined-up and multi-disciplinary approach to policy, involving a wide range of actors, is critical to 
meet the Government’s consistent poverty target. The lifecycle approach in the National Action 
Plan for Social Inclusion highlights three inter-connected policy themes for tackling poverty: income 
support, activation and services. The joined-up approach is underpinned by the EU concept of active 
inclusion based on minimum income, inclusive labour markets and access to quality services.
The policy focus in the NRP is on the linkages between poverty, employment and education, as 
emphasised in the integrated employment guidelines for the Europe 2020 strategy. The national 
priorities for tackling poverty are access to the labour market and to education and training in order 
to restore economic growth and to maximise employment – with additional supporting measures 
The national policy response to poverty is supported at EU level through the flagship initiative, the 
European Platform against Poverty and Social Exclusion: a European Framework for Social and 
Territorial Cohesion.
The latest national programme for social inclusion co-funded by the European Social Fund is the 
Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP). The aim of the programme is to 
reduce poverty and promote social inclusion and equality through local, regional and national 
engagement and collaboration.   
Cork
Cork is regarded as a successful county in many respects.  The Quality of Life Survey carried out as 
part of this LECP process highlighted that a significant majority of residents feel a sense of com­
munity with others in their neighbourhood.  A significant majority of residents surveyed also indi­
cated that they were either happy or very happy.  
Within the South West region, Cork County is economically performing strongest of all local author­
ity areas and is the fourth strongest performing County in Ireland (2011 Pobal HP Deprivation Index 
Scores). However, variances in performance pertain within the County, with some areas in the north 
and west of the county performing least well. In general, those areas with the strongest economic 
linkages to the Metropolitan Cork employment market perform well overall.  This situation is mirrored 
nationally, where analysis by Pobal of HP Deprivation Index Scores indicate that the most affluent 
areas of the country are distributed in concentric rings around the main population centres, mainly 
demarcating the urban commuter belts.
Employment and education are identified as the sustainable tools to tackle consistent poverty – 
supported by a range of interim measures. However, the scale, form and organisation of Cork’s 
future strategic spatial development will also have a significant impact on the meeting of our NRP 
targets to reduce consistent poverty. 
If threats exist to Cork’s future economic performance (as highlighted under Human Capital and 
Employment/Income sections of this plan), those threats also extend to our ability to reduce con­
sistent poverty and social exclusion.

133
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions that result in an improve­
ment in recorded deprivation levels in Cork (as measured by the HP Deprivation index) and 
particularly in those areas recorded as disadvantaged or very disadvantaged
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, in consultation with the Connectivity Asset Management Group, 
to develop a programme of actions to address the physical isolation of residents within the 
Cork region
Vision
Action 5
To achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction relating to 
civic engagement and sense of community reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by 
residents within each Municipal District
Action 6
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Social Inclusion Index to monitor and measure 
social inclusion within the Cork region
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that value every resident equally and contribute to reducing 
the number of persons in Cork experiencing consistent poverty, risk of poverty and social / 
economic exclusion
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, and in consultation with the Employment/Income and the Education Asset Management 
Groups, to develop a programme of actions to facilitate equality of opportunity to all residents 
in accessing employment and education
Action 2
In 2017, building on the suite of interventions already in place, to develop a programme of 
priority actions to assist those Cork residents who are excluded from participating in the 
workforce education and civic engagement

134
22. MULTI-CULTURALISM
Multiculturalism is the preservation of different cultures, or cultural identities, within a unified 
society, as a state or nation. Multiculturalism is also a body of thought in political philosophy about 
the proper way to respond to cultural and religious diversity. The mere tolerance of group differ­
ences is universally viewed as falling short of treating members of minority groups as equal citizens.
Multiculturalism grew exponentially as a result of expansion of international travel and trade in the 
past 150 years. Its earliest form was based on the sampling of foreign products, however, today it 
includes the acceptance and harnessing of cultural diversity for the benefit of societies.
Presently, multiculturalism is not only driven by ethics, but also by the imperative to efficiently 
management societies’ diverse cultural groups to the benefit of one and all. Research has connect­
ed the presence of new cultural communities to benefits such as:
▯
A source of diverse knowledge and experience
▯
The increase in innovation, creativity and prosperity in our city and region
▯
The enrichment of the cultural fabric by introducing new foods, music, traditions, beliefs and 
interests
▯
Enriching community life because of the diversity it brings
Hence, multiculturalism is both a driver and outcome of social change and economic growth.
Multi-culturalism in Ireland
Large-scale immigration to Ireland is a relatively new phenomenon. We are historically a country 
with a long history of emigration, however, this trend was reversed during a time of rapid econom­
ic expansion between 2000 and 2008. These trends – both our own history of emigration and our 
recent experiences of in-migration – are reflective of the population and demographic influences 
of economic growth. As highlighted in the section herein on Human Capital, people are our most 
important socio-economic asset.
Excluding refugees and asylum seekers, immigration into Ireland has largely been based on eco­
nomic criteria, with the Irish work permit system for non-EEA workers aiming to fill labour market 
shortages and has become increasingly directed at highly skilled migrants. Ireland is not a particu­
larly hostile environment for immigrants, when compared to other European countries, but ethnic 
groups can experience discrimination in various ways. 
The Census 2011 results, as set out in Migration and Diversity – A Profile of Diversity in Ireland, show 
that the number of non-Irish nationals living in Ireland grew from 224,261 persons in 2002 to 544,357 
in 2011, an increase of 143% over this nine year period.

135
Local Economic And Community Plan
Over the past two decades the demographics of Ireland have profoundly changed. Ireland has gone 
from being almost exclusively a white, Irish and Christian country into one of the most diverse 
countries in the world. There are now people living in Ireland representing 199 different nationalities. 
This change in demographics has been the most comprehensive and rapid in any European country 
for the past 65 years.
In contrast to the past experience of our European neighbours, the profile of migrant coming to 
Ireland is highly educated, with enhanced professional skills and English speaking. In addition, they 
are heavily represented within the workforce, home ownership and voter registration is increasing, 
as is volunteerism. 
Inter-culturalism
Interculturalism views integration of minority cultures as a two-way process and consultation with 
minority groups forms an essential part of this process. There is a strong link between effective 
accommodation of diverse cultures cultural, social and economic benefits, such as:
▯
Talent attraction and retention
▯
Creativity and innovation enhancement
▯
Enrichment of community life
▯
Contribution to attraction of Foreign Direct investment, as companies seek out regions that
are welcoming to their potential overseas employees
Future Cork
The future socio-economic vision for Cork, as set out in this plan, is for a forward thinking, innova­
tive, ambitious and growing region. It envisages the expansion of Cork up to one million residents 
in the future. This will be achieved via the retention of existing population, the return of Cork em­
igrants and the attraction of new population. 
With regard to in-migration, the attraction of new, skilled, economically active persons from abroad, 
will be a critical within this process. Both as additional population in itself, and as a symbol of what 
Cork can offer to foreign investment, our ability to attract persons from abroad will assist in our 
positioning as an internationally competitive and attractive place to live and work. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will contribute to Cork’s reputation as a high quality place 
to live and work for persons of all cultural backgrounds
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to undertake a multi-culture related behaviours and attitudes survey of existing 
residents 

136
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Action 2
In 2017, to identify a programme of actions to promote the social and economic benefits of 
multiculturalism
Place
Action 3
In 2017, to identify policies and actions that will enhance the experiences of cultural minorities 
living and working in Cork
Vision
Action 4
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding 
overall quality of life reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents originally from 
abroad living within each Municipal District
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Multiculturism Index that identifies, and com­
mences the measurement of, Actions of Cork’s regional multiculturalism

137
Local Economic And Community Plan
23. SOCIAL ACTIVITIES
Engaging with activities that we do not have to engage with is central to what being human is. We 
do not simply exist, we live, and we do this living in an incredibly wide variety of ways.
The overall aim of this plan is to begin a process that will lead to the removal of barriers to facilitate 
individuals and organisations in achieving their ambitions. By ambitions, we are not simply refer­
encing our work endeavours, we also include our social, community and personal ambitions. Social 
activities are, for most people, a central part of our life ambitions.
Reflecting the incredible variety of lifestyles and preferences that exist within our communities, the 
realm of social activities is extremely large. We have sporting, artistic, performance, environmental, 
education, literary, family, community and many more, social outlets. Furthermore, within each of 
these wide ranging pursuits are sub-categories and distinct organisations pursuing their own chosen 
social endeavours.   
Supporting Infrastructure
The physical infrastructure required to meet a community’s social needs is facilitated in a variety 
of amenities, such as, health centres, day centres, schools, colleges, allotments, museums, parks, 
libraries, public halls, places of worship, cemeteries, sports fields, workplaces, countryside, coastline, 
rivers, towns, etc. This infrastructure can be purpose build or can have a dual use as part of where 
we also live and work.
Government agencies, local authorities, local communities and social organisations are the primary 
providers of social infrastructure. A deeper understanding has developed within Ireland in recent 
years of the importance of social infrastructure to support or social ambitions, as reflected in 
legislative changes requiring direct provision of social facilities as part of any new residential de­
velopments.
Various organisations within the Cork region have ongoing plans – at varying stages of advancement 
– to continue to develop the social infrastructure that they are responsible for, such as, Cork County
Council’s ongoing development of its Greenway route, its network of parks etc., Cork City Council’s
plans to redevelop the city landfill site, Cork County GAA Board’s redevelopment of the Pairc Ui
Chaoimh campus, CIT’s and UCC’s continued expansion programme, as well as individual organisa­
tions plans to develop facilities for their own use.
Shared Infrastructure
However, the sharing of social infrastructure provides an opportunity for us to expand our support­
ing infrastructure and social opportunities while minimising costs. It also allows for a holistic, 
community based, approach to the facilitation of social activities.

138
Sharing of social infrastructure occurs regularly within the region – informally and formally. For 
example, cyclists, pedestrians and runners use our roads and footpaths, sporting clubs often use 
public parks, arts based organisations use schools and community halls, etc. Similarly, organisations 
sometimes formally share their facilities as a means of reducing the costs of developing and main­
taining their required infrastructure.
However, many social organisations are also homeless or have difficulty access suitable infrastruc­
ture to meet their needs. While funding is often the most significant challenge, funding requirements 
can be offset to some degree by the development and organisation of shared facilities and shared 
infrastructure. Furthermore, and particularly with regard to government agencies, the continued 
integration of leisure-based requirements into infrastructure design has significant potential to 
remove barriers for social activities. 
Cross Cutting Benefits
As with many assets identified as part of this plan, actions to facilitate social activities will have 
positive impacts on other areas of our lives also – and vice versa. For example, social and recreation 
activities are inherently interlinked with our health and well-being, and in turn healthy societies 
demonstrating greater engagement with social outlets. 
Cork
As part of the Quality of Life Survey undertaken for this project, residents reported the following:
▯
Four out of five residents were part of a social group
▯
Almost half of all residents were part of a sports organisation
▯
64% of residents were satisfied with leisure facilities
▯
Residents are normally physically active four days per week
▯
86% of residents are satisfied with their overall life/work balance
While overall residents are engaged with social activities and have a good life/work balance, clearly 
a significant minority are less than wholly satisfied with the provision of social facilities. This is an 
area that merits further analysis, toward the identification of supporting actions. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance access and quality of engagement of Cork 
residents to social activities
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, to complete an audit of public and private social and amenity infrastructure available 
for use by Cork residents and to develop a programme of monitoring of same

139
Local Economic And Community Plan
Action 2
In 2017, to develop and undertake a residents’ survey to establish the barriers that exist to 
their engaging with social activities
Place
Action 3
In 2018, to develop a programme of actions to meet the identified needs of residents and 
communities in accessing their preferred social activities
Action 4
In 2018, to develop a programme of actions to identify where shared provision can maximise 
access by residents and communities to their preferred social activities
Vision
Action 5
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of engagement and satisfac­
tion regarding social activities reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within 
each Municipal District
Action 6
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Social Activities Index that will identify, measure 
and monitor the availability and quality of social activities to Cork residents. 

140
Introduction
Culture can be variously described, but an apt description is as follows; culture is the arts and other 
manifestations of human intellectual achievement regarded collectively. Hence, as mankind’s progress 
has been determined largely by our intellectual outputs, culture is essentially the manifestation of 
all humanity’s endeavours. Of course, outputs vary by region, country, population, etc. and, therefore, 
culture varies by place. 
The role of culture in socio-economic development is multi-layered.  It has its own intrinsic value, 
as a primary mode of creative expression and communication. It also posseses extrinisic benefits 
such as being a significant factor in regional development leading to increased attractiveness of 
regions for tourists, residents and investors.  It may alos be seem as an active agent in social de­
velopment based on knowledge, tolerance and creativity.
Arts and Culture play a fundamental role across many aspects of social, economic and community 
life.  These roles include:
▯
As a means of expression and creativity, individually and collectively
▯
In the cultural identity of a region and a people
▯
In the social well-being of individuals and communities
▯
In the integration and formation of cohesive communities (social inclusion)
▯
In developing healthy economies, including individual enterprise and tourism
▯
In place-making
Ireland’s culture, as expressed in its language and architecture, through to its artistic production, 
its indigenous art forms, festivals, events and heritage sites, is becoming increasingly valued as an 
expression of our identity, history and achievements. 
Cork
County Cork has a rich and distinctive cultural aspect   It is important to distinguish between 
contemporary artistic and cultural production on the one hand and what is broadly termed cultur­
al heritage on the other.  Contemporary artistic and cultural production encompasses language, all 
art forms, symbols  and modes of communication through which meaning is transmitted and un­
derstood.  Cultural heritage is the legacy of physical artefacts (cultural property) and intangible 
attributes of a group or society that are inherited from past generations and maintained to the 
present.  It includes tangible culture (such as buildings, monuments, landscapes, books, works of 
art, and artefacts), intangible culture (such as folklore, traditions, language, and knowledge), and 
natural heritage (including culturally-significant landscapes, and biodiversity).  
24. ARTS, HERITAGE &
CULTURE

141
Local Economic And Community Plan
Culture is therefore continuously evolving, combining in a complex manner both contemporary 
meaning and communication with the historic cultural inheritance of previous generations.
 Various organisations, including local authorities and educational institutions (CIT’s. Crawford 
College of Art & Design and Cork School of Music for example), already have an important role in 
supporting the sustainable development of these cultural assets and will continue to do so by in­
creasing local awareness of our heritage and cultural identity, and by promoting the cultural tourism 
industry.  For example, Cork County’s Arts and Heritage plans guides our endeavours in these areas, 
seeking to both preserve our cultural inheritance and support opportunities for creative expression.
Culture and Quality of Life 
The indigenous cultural, heritage, linguistic and sporting traditions of the County are a primary 
source of local identity, pride of place and cultural interaction.  Collectively they contribute enor­
mously to social cohesion. . What are termed the creative industries, which include the work of our 
artists and the commercial  ceative sectors are increasingly seen as having significant potential to 
act as catalysts for economic regeneration through intellectual property, design, tourism and other 
areas.  This plan recognises the difficult economic reality faced by many individual creative artists. 
The study The Living and Working conditions of Artists (2010) found that the average mean income 
derived from artists’ creative output was less than €15,000 per annum.  The study found that  “the 
most important factor cited was the lack of financial return. The next three factors cited were a lack 
of work opportunities, a lack of time for creative work due to other responsibilities, and a lack of 
access to funding and other financial supports.  
Apart from the professional creative industries, it is important to recognise the input of voluntary 
organisations and communities to sustain, promote and transmit cultural and other social activity. 
This plan seeks to promote a process that will support the work of those organisations and com­
munities.  Participation in the arts, culture and recreation provide important social benefits which 
contribute to the social capital and quality of life of communities.  Access to facilities and oppor­
tunity to participate is critical in this regard.  The National Action Plan for Social Inclusion notes 
that improving access to facilities for arts, culture and recreation is an important means of increas­
ing participation in voluntary activities and has a positive impact on socially disadvantaged indi­
viduals, groups and areas.  As set out in the Social Activities section herein also, our cultural facil­
ities and cultural pursuits can be supported by cross-cutting measures. Investment in communities, 
tourism, regeneration, etc., if co-ordinated, can also play a significant role in the protection, and 
enhancement of our cultural assets. 
 
While sports and other recreational infrastructure is often well accounted for, many areas in Cork 
County do not possess any significant cultural infrastructure to enable community access to and 
participation in the field of arts and culture.  The Irish language plays an important part in the 
linguistic and cultural heritage of Ireland and Cork contains two Gaeltacht Areas, Oilean Chléire, and 
Gaeltacht Muscraí.  In the 2011 Census over 40% of Cork residents indicated they could speak the 
Irish language. The continued use and growth of Irish as a living language throughout the County 
needs to be promoted if this linguistic heritage is to be retained and is to prosper.  In terms of 
tourism, arts and culture is an economic asset, From a cultural perspective the county is home to 
over thirty independent arts festivals, covering almost al artforms.  These along with the resources 
of the broader cultural secotr can be used to cultivate cultural or creative tourist markets, thus 
contributing significantly to the overall tourism promotion of the country.  

142
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance access and quality of engagement of Cork 
residents with all cultural activities
Opportunity
Action 1
By 2018, to complete an audit of all arts, heritage and culture infrastructure available for use 
by Cork residents, to underpin the identification of barriers to residents accessing arts and 
culture
Action 2
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions to enhance the arts, heritage and culture offering 
within the Cork region including mutual understanding and inclusivity
Place
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to create and promote a 
regional network of arts, heritage and culture facilities within the Cork region
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme of actions to assist community and 
volunteer groups in their supporting role in the development and maintenance of cork’s arts, 
heritage and cultural assets
Vision
Action 5
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of engagement and satisfac­
tion regarding arts and culture reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within 
each Municipal District
Action 6
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Culture Index that will identify, measure and 
monitor the availability and quality of arts, heritage and culture in the Cork region
Conclusion
The process provides an opportunity to promote our arts and culture as one of the building blocks 
of our social, economic and sustainable development.  It requires a cohesive and integrated approach 
to the development of arts and cultural participation among all development agencies.  Culture is 
inherently cross cutting, for example linking policies on economic growth and regeneration with 
those on environment, heritage and infrastructure provision. 

143
Local Economic And Community Plan
25. SECURITY
Security is the bedrock on which a society’s cultural, social, economic and environmental achieve­
ments are built.  In a modern state, security and safety are conceived as the ultimate guarantee of 
freedom and present themselves in many forms. While environmental, energy, economic, etc. se­
curity is critically important to our personal and collective well-being, this section deals specifical­
ly with personal and property related security. Various other sections in this document address the 
security of other assets under those heading.
  
As a small open economy, Ireland benefits from globalisation, which continues apace, and we are 
now more closely linked and inter-dependent on other nations than ever before.  At the same time, 
Ireland is exposed to all of the threats, uncertainties and challenges that accompany modern life 
and globalisation.  
However, according to the World Health Organisation’s Global Peace Index 2015, Ireland ranks 12th 
in the world in terms of safety as a place to live and work. Within an ever-more connected interna­
tional context, this ranking represents a significant asset to Ireland. Personally, socially and eco­
nomically, crime has a cost factor that undermines significant societal advances achieved over many 
years. The lower our crime rate, the wealthier we will be – in the widest context of the word - and 
the more attractive a place Ireland will be for people to live, work and invest.
  
A broad range of government departments and agencies are assigned with different security re­
sponsibilities. The Department of Justice, Equality & Law Reform oversee policing matters and the 
performance of An Garda Síochána, whilst the Department of Defence is primarily concerned with 
ensuring the secure and stable environment necessary for economic growth and social development 
via our Defence Forces.
In addition, it is important to note that the factors that contribute to the stimulation of crime – 
absence of opportunity, unequal sharing of wealth, marginalisation, absence of education, etc. – are 
also addressed via a range of Government Departments and initiatives, as well as this LECP irself. 
Hence, socio-economic inclusion and crime prevention are inextricably linked, contributing to our 
overall efforts to reduce crime and increase our overall security – personal, social and economic.
Crime Levels and Perceptions of Safety 
Safety is an important factor when measuring overall quality of life.  Actual and perceived safety 
of citizens is one of a number of central factors that needs to be taken into account in this regard. 
The Quality of Life Survey of County Cork residents, undertaken as part of this project, indicates 
that a significant majority of residents are satisfied that the level of crime in their area, while un­
welcome, is generally acceptable.  An overwhelming majority of residents indicate that they felt 
either safe or very safe in their local areas - both during daytime and at night.  These results suggest, 
overall, that Cork is a relatively safe and crime free location in which to live - reflecting Ireland’s 
high ranking internationally in this regard.  

144
However, it is recognised that a minority of residents do not have a positive perception of crime 
and safety in Cork. Further monitoring and analysis is required to tackle actual and perceived se­
curity issues in these areas.
In 2014, the CSO published a report Garda Recorded Crime Statistics 2008-2012 demonstrating a 
reduction in crime rates across Cork County over the period.  Some of the key findings were: 
▯
In the combined County Region, Cork had the ninth highest crime rate of the 21 Garda regions
in the state
▯
In the combined County Region, in the period 2008 to 2012, crime levels fell by more than 25%.
Cork West had experiencing the biggest reduction while reduction in Cork North was noticea­
bly slower
▯
In the combined County Region, Cork had one of the lowest burglary rates in the entire coun­
try.  There have been dramatic reductions in theft in Cork City and Cork West in recent years
while these have remained unchanged in North Cork
More recent figures from June 2014 show crime levels in the county are continuing to fall at a faster 
rate than the national average.  Across the country, there was a 3.7% decrease in overall crime levels 
in the year.  The number of recorded crimes has fallen across the three Garda divisions in Cork (CSO 
figures) by a combined average of 6.7% in a 12 month period.
Co-Operation
There is already a significant level of co-operation between various agencies in relation to policing, 
security matters and emergency planning.  For example, Joint Policing Committees (JPCs) aim to 
develop greater consultation, co-operation and synergy on policing and crime issues between An 
Garda Síochána, local authorities, stakeholders and elected local representatives. JPCs also facilitate 
the participation of the community and voluntary sectors in this regard.   Additional initiatives - such 
as the Text Alert crime prevention system (a joint initiative of An Garda Síochána, Muintir na Tíre, 
Neighbourhood Watch and the Irish Farmers Association) - engage members of the community to 
assist in the reduction of crime, particularly in rural areas.
Local authorities are also required to have in place Major Emergency Plans under the requirements 
of ‘A Framework for Major Emergency Management.’ Such plans are the basis for interagency co-op­
eration and have been prepared to facilitate the response to (and recovery from) major emergencies.
Security is a crucial aspect of resident’s lives and a key element in promoting Cork as a place to 
live, work and invest. Continuing co-operation between agencies and stakeholders will ensure that 
Cork continues to remain a safe, secure and attractive place.  
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance security – personal and property related 
– within the Cork region

145
Local Economic And Community Plan
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions that will reduce the incentive for acts of crime to 
occur within the Cork region 
Action 2
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions that will increase the detection and prosecution 
rates relating to acts of crime occurring within the Cork region
 
Action 3
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions that will contribute to the feeling of security among 
residents within the Cork region 
Place
Action 4
During the lifetime of this, to achieve an increase in the level of security reported to the Cork 
Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District.
Vision
Action 5
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Security Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, permanent Actions for security within the Cork region 
VISA
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet
5656 343 787 888
SECURITY

146
26. REGULATORY 
ENVIRONMENT
Government regulations, and their implementation, can have a positive or negative effect on the 
processes that they serve. Regulation is necessary and important in the socio-economic conversa­
tion, in order to ensure that short-termism does not prevent the sustainable management of our 
resources and supporting infrastructure. 
Administrative regulation governs the practical functioning of the public and private sectors – at­
tempting to set the conditions for progress and growth. Regulatory reform is directed to making 
sure that these regulations are fully responsive to changes in the economic, social, environmental 
and technical conditions surrounding them.
 
However, regulation becomes a barrier to progress when it is inappropriately applied. 

Context
In order to understand the relationship between regulatory activities and people / organisations 
achieving their ambitions, it is appropriate to consider the following:
▯
▯
Understanding linkages - the regulatory process, regardless of what sector it relates to, must 
understand and measure its impact
▯
▯
Facilitate competition - in all sectors, a certain degree of competition is essential to the inno­
vative process
▯
▯
Streamline regulations - in the interest of economic efficiency and innovation, regulatory re­
form should seek to remove duplicative, onerous and inefficient regulations
▯
▯
Use technology based approaches - maximum use should be made of regulatory approaches 
that are technology-friendly, allowing for ease of interaction
▯
▯
Compare internationally – by understanding how regulation is formulated and applied inter­
nationally, regions can ensure that they are competitive in attracting inward investment
Regulation in Ireland
Regulatory reform is an on-going governmental process, For example, in 2008, reacting to the 
country’s emerging financial crisis, the Department of the Taoiseach commissioned a report to review 
the economic regulatory environment in Ireland. Recently, the Department of the Environment, 
Community and Local Government undertook a review of residential building standards in the context 
of housing costs and supply. 
At the local authority level, a range of initiatives have been implemented to facilitate more stream­
lined regulatory application and ease of access by customers. 

147
Local Economic And Community Plan
In fact, a 2015 World Bank Group Flagship Report identified Ireland as 13th out of 185 countries in 
terms of ease of doing business. This report uses a range of data collected across a number of 
themes to identify the level of ease which companies and individuals can operate around the world. 
In fact, as well as its overall high ranking, Ireland was also noted as one of the countries that most 
improved its regulatory environment, as measured by the report.
 
Regional Regulation
While governmental organisations and local authorities continue to strive to achieve the highest 
standards of regulation, notwithstanding some collaboration in this area, regulation is not gener­
ally engaged with on a regional or spatial basis by companies and individuals.
However, inward investment is attracted principally to a region rather than to a specific location, 
allowing the regional benefits and advantages offered to be harnessed. Hence, developing a posi­
tive regional reputation in regulatory terms and by developing a regional brand that includes ease 
of doing business, the Cork region can add to its attractiveness as a place to invest in.  
Institutional Regulatory Relationships
One of the key assets identified in this plan is Institutional Relationships. By enhancing our in­
ter-agency co-operation within the Cork region, we will maximise our collective strength. Similarly, 
by collectively ensuring that we manage and implement our regulatory functions in a way that ensure 
they are not barriers, we will gain an economic competitive advantage. Furthermore, this will also 
aid individuals in their interactions with regulators, contributing to a the creation of a high quality 
place to live.
 
It is important to note that, while identifying our regulatory environment as an important asset to 
our region, it is not advocated that we downgrade our regulatory function. Appropriate regulation 
is a key feature of a sustainable society and absence of regulation has been a significant factor in 
many historical societal difficulties. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will enhance Cork’s reputation as a location where reg­
ulation is applied effectively and where ease of doing business is facilitated
Opportunities
Action 1
In 2018, and in collaboration with key regulatory agencies and key stakeholders, develop a 
programme of actions to enhance Cork’s regulatory environment within the economic, social 
and environmental sectors
Action 2
By 2018, and in collaboration with key regulatory agencies and key stakeholders, develop a 
programme of actions to identify specific opportunities for inter-agency co-operation in the 
regulatory sector

148
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 3
In 2017, to identify the key regulatory functions undertaken within the Cork region and their 
linkages to enterprise and communities
Action 4
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to identify where enhanced technology application 
can benefit regulatory functions within the Cork region
Action 5
By 2018, to undertake a comparative analysis with the regulatory performance of internation­
ally competitive regions to Cork
Vision
Action 6
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Regulatory Index that will identify, measure 
and monitor regulatory performance within the Cork region
LAW

149
Local Economic And Community Plan
27. VALUES
Societal and organisational values are often viewed as abstract and aspirational.  However, suc­
cessful societies and organisations view their values much differently and see them as the foun­
dations on which their success is built.  Values can be described in many ways, but one simple 
description is as follows; values are what we want to be like and how we want to interact with each 
other and others.
Our values form an important part of the socio-economic culture of our society. Social values, norms 
and institutions explain the way in which social processes operate in a given society. They are the 
social sources of patterned interaction.
Values account for the stability of the social order. They provide the general guidelines for conduct 
and, in doing so, they facilitate social control. Values are the criteria people use in assessing their 
daily lives, arranging their priorities, measuring their pleasures and losses, and choosing between 
alternative courses of action.
Values are not always obvious and they need to be discussed and socialised. While we may think 
that we share common values, often we simply share the terminology. This is an ongoing process 
that needs to be permitted to evolve as our socio-economic circumstances change, with leadership 
critical - in terms of developing clear values and protecting those values thereafter. 
Clear values inform our collective behaviour and ultimately determine our collective brand and 
reputation. In turn, a high quality brand will attract investment – human and capital.
Investment 
Value
Behaviours
Reputation
& Brand

150
Importance of Values
Our values tell us what we collectively value and this concept is at the core of this LECP process. 
The consultations undertaken to inform this plan asked, What do you Value? – personally, socially, 
economically, etc. Those conversations informed the identification of the key assets listed in this 
plan and, if managed well, those assets will assist us in providing the opportunities that residents 
of Cork want to have access to.
 
But the opportunities that existing residents of Cork wish to access to are also the opportunities 
that future residents of Cork seek. Comparative international socio-economic surveys (to the Cork 
Quality of Life survey undertaken by this project), shows that people all over the World value similar 
things – albeit to varying degrees.
 
Family, community, health, connectedness, life-work balance, etc. all feature highly in the list of 
things that people value, to be coupled with, productive employment, income, economic opportu­
nity, etc. that provide people with the ability to shape their own lives.
 
The collective process identified within this plan, to protect and enhance the key assets identified, 
is informed by what are collectively important to us. In turn, these things that we value inform our 
collective endeavours and what we have to offer as a Cork society. Hence, our social values are at 
the heart of our socio-economic story. 
Reputation
This process of values identification underpins our collective reputation and brand. Branding is a 
key consideration when seeking to attract investment – human or capital. While branding may be 
historically seen as an economic vehicle, it is also a critical vehicle in retaining and attracting the 
people that are important to Cork’s future.  
Hence, the proposed Cork Asset Management Forum identified herein to strategically oversee the 
ongoing LECP process, will have a critical role in stimulating continued discussion around what it is 
that Cork values. By facilitating this discussion, Cork will remain relevant – socially and economi­
cally – and will also enhance and protect its reputation as a high quality place to live and work. The 
Asset Management Structures section of this plan sets out how a Quality of Life Forum could be a 
useful vehicle to facilitate this ongoing conversation. 
Asset Management Goal
To promote the continued identification, socialisation and protection of the socio-economic 
values which underpin the Cork region
Opportunity
Action 1
On establishment, to become the Cork Asset Management Forum in order to promote the 
protection of the socio-economic values which underpin the Cork region

151
Local Economic And Community Plan
Place
Action 2
Within the lifetime of this plan, to organise the first Cork Quality of Life Forum event to stim­
ulate socio-economic discussions within the region and to inform our future collective com­
munity and economic endeavours
Vision
Action 3
To update and undertake the Cork Quality of Life Survey on a five year cycle

152
28. INSTITUTIONAL 
RELATIONSHIPS
Removing barriers and increasing efficiencies can appear intimidating at first. Difficulties experienced 
with housing, employment, social inclusion, health, transport, energy, environment, education, and 
many more sectors, have complex and inter-related issues affecting them. Often it seems that a 
particular action will only achieve minor or insignificant progress.
However, pushing a car uphill presents us with a similar problem. On our own the task is impossible, 
but with the assistance of others it is wholly possible. In fact, with the help of many others, it is not 
beyond us to push a fire truck or bus up a hill. That is the power of relationships and by working 
together we can achieve anything we wish to.
This plan, and more importantly the process that is to follow, is about harnessing our collective 
strength and giving it clarity of purpose. By having a shared destination (vision) and clearly defined 
collective goals (key assets), we use our collective abilities to our mutual benefit. This includes 
private and public bodies, government and non-governmental agencies.
Relationships
There exists a range of relationship types available to stakeholders in order to progress their 
commons goals. These include:
▯
▯
Networking – exchange of information
▯
▯
Co-ordination – modification of activities
▯
▯
Co-operation – both of the above, but also coupled with resource sharing
▯
▯
Collaboration – all of the above, but also helping other agencies to be more effective 
▯
▯
Multi-sector Collaboration  - all of the above and across multiple sectors, to effect sys­
temic changes
The types of relationships listed above require different resources to be applied (human and finan­
cial), as well as varying levels of trust, time and skills. However, like any relationship, inter-agency 
relationships are built over time and go through various phases – from networking in its simplest 
form to multi-sector collaboration at its most complex. 
Before entering into any significant relationship, it is important for each partner organisation to 
understand the purpose, nature and implications of the relationship proposed. Factors to be con­
sidered include:
▯
▯
What is the overall goal to be accomplished from the relationship?
▯
▯
What kind of relationship is required?

153
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
Are resources available to facilitate the relationship, or, can the resources be accessed?
▯
▯
Is their sufficient commitment and trust to support the relationship?
By first understanding the implications of the relationship, and by then socialising that understand­
ing, solid and productive foundations can be laid between stakeholders. 
Challenges
When organisations and stakeholders work together the potential benefits are significant. However, 
challenges will always be present when groups are trying to work together in concert. These can 
include:
▯
▯
Cultural bias toward working individually
▯
▯
Mistrust
▯
▯
Absence of culture of inclusivity
▯
▯
Poor communication skills
▯
▯
Absence of clarity of purpose
▯
▯
Absence of leadership
By consciously working together to overcome these challenges, it is possible to create an opera­
tional environment that maximises our collective strength. Some of the key tools to overcome these 
challenges include:
▯
▯
Involve all stakeholders
▯
▯
Collectively develop the vision, process and goals
▯
▯
Create organisational structures that are a good fit and are mutually supportive
▯
▯
Listen
▯
▯
Build initially on areas of agreement
▯
▯
Learn about each other’s needs
▯
▯
Respect the corporate integrity of all stakeholders
▯
▯
Expect problems and have patience
Cork Relationships
In Cork we have many examples of inter-agency relationships that have borne significant fruit for 
the region – public and private.  This plan seeks to build upon that track record of co-operation in 
order to protect and enhance the key Cork assets identified herein.
 
But we also wish for our institutional and stakeholder co-operation to be more than just a tool, and 
in itself become a key regional asset. By building upon our existing good relationships, in order to 
form a network of stakeholders with a shared clarity of purpose, we will create an attractive asset 
that will facilitate and enhance inward regional investment. In this regard, the continuation of the 
existing and productive relationship between the two local authorities in Cork will be of significant 

154
 Local Economic And Community Plan
benefit to the safeguarding and progression of the key assets identified within this LECP. Cork City 
and Metropolitan Cork is recognised as an important socio-economic driver within the southern 
region, with the city and county critical mass population in excess of 500,000 persons a vital asset.
A key finding of this LECP process was the desire that exists for all of Cork to speak as a single entity 
and to organise itself around a shared vision. Clarity of purpose, supported by stakeholder and 
delivery agency co-operation, is a powerful asset that is attractive to individuals, communities and 
investors. In this regard, the continuation of the existing and productive relationship between the 
two local authorities in Cork will be of significant benefit to the safeguarding and progression of 
the key assets identified within this LECP. Cork City and Metropolitan Cork is recognised as an im­
portant socio-economic driver within the southern region, with the city and county critical mass 
population in excess of 500,000 persons a vital asset.
Asset Management Goal
To identify and promote actions that will expand, enhance and protect stakeholder relationships 
within the Cork region
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to become the Cork Asset Management Co-Ordination Group to oversee and coordinate 
the actions and outputs of all Asset Management Groups
Place
Action 2
In 2017, building on existing relationships and initiatives, to develop a programme of actions 
to protect and enhance existing regional, national and international institutional relationships, 
and, to develop new institutional relationships. 
Vision
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Institutional Relationships Index that 
identifies, and commences the measurement of, the nature and extent of productive institu­
tional relationships within the Cork region 

155
Local Economic And Community Plan
29. DATA CO-ORDINATION
This LECP seeks to give direction, or clarity of purpose, to our collective endeavours within the Cork 
region. It begins by identifying what it is that is important to us – in economic and community terms 
– and then it seeks to develop a process to protect and enhance those things (assets) that we 
identify as important. The third step in this process is the monitoring and measurement of our key 
assets.   
Users of socio-economic statistics rely heavily on the type, quantity and quality of the information 
they can access. Their needs have historically been met simply by more extensive data collection, 
subject to usual concerns over financial costs, survey respondent burdens, etc. However, users (both 
private and public sector) have expressed a continuing desire for an integrated and coherent system 
of socio-economic statistics and analysis. In this case, additional data will not be sufficient; the 
more important constraint is the absence of an agreed conceptual and organisational approach.
Nature of Data Collected
The government, as well as public and private bodies, create, collect and hold large amounts of 
information and data – including, financial data, health data, educational data, transportation data, 
population data, environmental data etc. Public agencies, in particular, have become large reposi­
tories for essential data. The analysis of this data, coupled with government policy priorities, helps 
decide how to allocate public resources - such as, the provision of new infrastructure like roads, 
hospitals, housing and schools.
Traditionally, no local shared platform exists for public bodies and government departments to 
co-ordinate data collection and presentation. Data collection and presentation largely reflects the 
operational structures of each organisation, relative to the organisations available resources. There 
is significant scope to co-ordinate data collection at the local and regional levels – particularly in 
spatial terms, where complementary data outputs are at times generally aligned, but are often not 
spatially compatible.
The conventional formats for releasing data include, reports, strategies, press releases and state­
ments, where the data is already interpreted and packaged. Below is a table of the types of data 
that is collected on a regular basis.
Data Routinely collected by public agencies
finance data – government revenue and spending figures
health data – hospital waiting times or infection rates
transport data – timetables, real-time traffic updates and usage statistics
education data – statistics on early school leavers and educational achievements
population data – census information and household poverty statistics
environmental data – bathing water quality or air pollution level

156
Open Data
There are many areas where we can expect open data to be of value and where examples of how 
it has been used already exist. There are also many different groups of people and organisations 
who can benefit from the availability of open data, including government itself. At the same time it 
is not possible to predict precisely how and where value will be created in the future. The nature 
of innovation is that advancements often spring from unlikely sources. This is perhaps the greatest 
strength and benefit of open data – it’s potential for use in innovations that we cannot currently 
predict.
It is already possible to point to a large number of areas where open government data is creating 
value. Some of these areas include:
▯
Transparency and democratic control
▯
Participation
▯
Self-empowerment
▯
Improved or new private products and services
▯
Innovation
▯
Improved efficiency of government services
▯
Improved effectiveness of government services
▯
Impact measurement of policies
▯
New knowledge from combined data sources and patterns in large data volumes
The facilitation of access open data is an important tool in developing an innovative, growth economy. 
Public sector data is used as the basis for many products and services offered to citizens. The value 
of the EU Public Sector Information market is estimated at €27 billion. 
Data For Decision Makers, Business & Citizens
The modernisation of public administration, research expansion and commercialisation of research, 
have been identified as important underlying factors in assisting in the economic growth and 
competitiveness of Ireland. There is within this space an opportunity to use public sector data as 
a building block for the development of innovative ideas, services and business propositions.
There are clear advantages to be gained by moving toward a more co-ordinated, targeted, and open, 
model of data design, production and delivery that leverages collaboration between citizens, 
businesses and civil society. This goes hand in hand with the ‘Digital Agenda for Europe’ which was 
launched to help the EU exit the economic crises and to face emerging societal challenges. 
Measuring What We Value
In addition to how data is collected and presented by each agency, there is also potential for greater 
alignment in terms of what data we collectively target to measure. This plan seeks to identify Cork’s 
key assets, recommending the protection, development and management of these key assets via 
inter-agency co-operation. It is further recommended herein that our collective data measurements 
should reflect this focus on our key assets – put simply, we should measure what we value.

157
Local Economic And Community Plan
By agreeing what we value and what our priorities are in socio-economic terms, we can then focus 
our collective resources on targeted alignment and data collection. In addition, the presentation 
of this collective data – in the form of the Cork Asset Index – can be a powerful tool in promoting 
Cork as a high quality place to live and work. 
Work in this area has already commenced via the Regional Indicators Report which was issued by 
the South West Regional Authority in 2014. That report sought to provide an innovative approach 
to monitoring the performance of the Regional Planning Guidelines and ancillary policy initiatives 
in achieving EU, National and Regional objectives. While the development of a co-ordinated and 
shared data base for the Cork region is no small undertaking, the potential regional benefits are 
considerable. 
Asset Management Goal
To identify, promote and co-ordinate actions to collect, organise and share data relevant to 
Cork’s Key Assets
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to identify and agree with relevant agencies, a roadmap to achieve collective alignment 
in the collection, sharing and presentation of data by all public bodies and stakeholders within 
the Cork region 
Action 2
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions required to create a Cork Data Hub as a reposi­
tory of collective and aligned, regional data 
Place
Action 3
During the lifetime of this plan, establish a Cork Data Hub that collects, interprets and presents 
regional data centred on Cork’s Key Assets
Action 4
During the lifetime of this plan and, via the establishment of the Cork Data Hub and combin­
ing the data outputs of the Asset Management Groups, make available at regional and Munic­
ipal District levels relevant information under Cork’s Key Asset headings
Vision
Action 5
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Cork Asset Index that measures and presents the 
performance of the Cork region’s Key Assets - utilising the data outputs of the Asset Manage­
ment Groups 

158
30. REPUTATION & BRAND
A brand is the cumulative perception people have about a place, product or organization, drawn 
from all sources.  A brand is a promise of what to expect.  It encompasses all of the experiences 
associated with it. Critically, a brand can be positive or negative.
 
In recent decades a greater understanding has emerged regarding the benefits associated with 
creating a place brand in particular. People are attracted to live and work in particular locations for 
a variety of reasons, but the overall quality of the life offered is central to that thought process. As 
the critical resource in economic development, human capital is followed by capital investment – 
where social and economic gains can be leveraged from productivity.
 
While the above narrative is a somewhat simplified version of the complex interactions that inform 
individual choices, all developed countries are competing to attract skilled workers to contribute 
to their planned socio-economic expansion. Those places that offer the best socio-economic op­
portunities are the places that are most successful in retaining their own skilled population and in 
attracting in-migration. 
However, a place brand must be underpinned by a real offering. An initial positive brand will be 
soon eroded if the product offered does not match the preceding reputation. In terms of place 
brand, a region is wholly dependent on the collective efforts of all stakeholders – public and private. 
How well all stakeholders work toward a shared destination, and operate with a clarity of purpose, 
will determine its sustainable place brand.  
As a nation with a relatively small indigenous population and economically dependent on attract­
ing skills and investment into our regions, our ability to compete internationally is critical – across 
the full spectrum of social and economic considerations. The better the product we offer, the more 
successful we will be.  
Cork Brand
Cork has a reputation of being a high quality place to live and work. This is borne out by our eco­
nomic success as a region (see Employment and Income section herein) and by high satisfaction 
ratings of residents (see Quality of Life section herein). This is despite our modest population growth 
rates over the past decades.
 
Both Cork City and County Councils, with the assistance and input from a wide range of stakehold­
ers in the Cork Region, have developed a compelling and coherent regional brand strategy for the 
development of the Cork region as a whole. 

159
Local Economic And Community Plan
The overall aim of the Cork Brand as stated in the strategy is to:
The LECP process seeks to support the fundamental concept contained in this strategy. 
The Cork Building Our Brand strategy outlines the seven key messages that Cork as a region must 
communicate to both the general public and the wider global audience. These seven messages are 
seen as key to cork regional competiveness both nationally and internationally. The seven key 
messages are as follows:
▯
▯
Accessible & Connected
▯
▯
Growth Sectors
▯
▯
Champion Companies
▯
▯
Talent
▯
▯
Value Balance
▯
▯
Quality of Life Balance 
▯
▯
Business Support & Collaboration
Coupled with the development of the key Cork assets identified in this plan, the promotion of Cork 
as a high quality place brand is critical to our future endeavours. Significant progress has been 
made in this regard, and the post-LECP structures identified herein seek to build on this progressive 
work. The goal in this regard is to not only have the Cork region known internationally as a great 
place to live and work, but to actually be a great place to live and work. 
Deliver a shared and coherent approach for the strategic brand­
ing and marketing that grows demand for the Cork Region to 
support business growth for the Cork Region and Ireland. Stra­
tegic branding and marketing means the promotion and devel­
opment of what the Cork Region wants to be known for in terms 
of its offer, experience and reputation. This is the detailed home­
work, it is not about logos and strap lines. It should help all in 
the Cork Region “sing from the same hymn sheet.
Asset Management Goal
To continue and enhance the promotion of the Cork region, as commenced by the Cork Build­
ing Our Brand strategy
Opportunity
Action 1
In 2017, to engage with the post-LECP Asset Management Structures identified within this plan 
as a platform to promote Cork’s socio-economic offering

160
Place
Action 3
Within the lifetime of this plan, to inform the work of, and to engage with, the first Cork Quality 
of Life Forum event
Action 4
To inform inputs into the Cork Quality of Life Survey, to be conducted by the Values Asset 
Management Group
Vision
Action 5
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish a methodology for the periodic monitoring of 
Cork’s local, national and international reputation
Action 2
During the lifetime of the this plan , building on existing relationships and initiatives, and in 
consultation with the Institutional Relationships Asset Management Group, to continue to 
promote the Cork region, nationally and internationally, as an attractive place to live, work 
and trade with
Building The
Cork Brand

161
Local Economic And Community Plan
SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY & 
ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES
It is important at this juncture to reflect on the relationship between social and economic policy 
– and, thereafter, the nature of socio-economic actions. While there is an understandable desire to 
separate social and economic actions, it almost always holds that actions in one sphere impacts 
on the other – such as, education, employment, transport, etc.
 
For example, high quality public transport is a key economic consideration, as it allows for the cost 
effective movement of people, contributes to lower wage demands and provides for fluidity within 
the labour market. However, an effective public transport network also allows for the accessing of 
services and goods by persons who cannot afford private transport, as well as the democratisation 
of employment (where residents have the ability to choose between employment locations). In 
addition, public transport has a significant role to play in the reduction of pollution and energy use, 
with positive local and global impacts. Hence, the enhancement of a single asset – in this example, 
public transport - can produce significant economic, social and environmental benefits.  
This LECP seeks to identify our key socio-economic actions areas (assets) and a methodology to 
develop those assets. As part of the methodology to progress Cork’s Key Assets, this plan is mindful 
of the Local Economic and Community Plan Guidelines 2015 and the requirement for community and 
economic actions to be overseen by our Local Community Development Committees and our Eco­
nomic Strategic Policy Committee respectively.
It is recommended that this be achieved via the formation of the Asset Management Co-Ordination 
Group, as referenced in the preceding sections. It is further recommended that this operational 
oversight group consist of Economic Strategic Policy Committee, Local Community Development 
Committee, Lead Agency and Stakeholder representatives. This will ensure that the dual aims of a) 
oversight of community and economic actions by the LCDCs and Economic SPC respectively and b) 
identification of cross-cutting actions can be achieved. This in turn will result in a reduction in 
service overlaps and a greater clarity of collective purpose – two key principles of the Local Gov­
ernment Reform Act 2014. 
 The following section sets out a summary of the Community and Economic Objectives (Assets) for 
the first Cork County LECP.
SECTION 3 - Summary & Asset Management

162
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will ensure the development of human 
capital within Cork to meet the current and future socio-economic needs of the 
region 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 
2017, 
in 
conjunction with 
the 
Education Asset Management Group, to 
identify the key educational needs (in 
conjunction with the National Strategy 
for Higher Education to 2030) required to 
meet the projected future economic 
vision for the Cork region 
Human 
Capital 
Action 2 
In 2017, develop a programme of 
actions to achieve the Government’s 
targets regarding entrepreneurship and 
start-ups, as set down in its 2014 
National 
Entrepreneurship 
Policy 
Statement 
Place 
Action 5 
In 2016, to engage with the National 
Planning Framework process, in order to 
advocate for the sustainable growth of 
the Cork regional population in excess of 
its growth rates over the past 20 years
Action 6 
In 2017, develop a programme of 
actions to enable the Cork region to 
retain 
its 
youth 
population 
into 
adulthood 
Action 9 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Human Capital Index to monitor and measure the key 
socio-economic attributes of Cork residents 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
In 
2017, 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
actions 
to 
meet 
the 
personal 
development needs of Cork residents 
Action 4 
In 
2017, 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
actions 
to 
facilitate 
residents 
in 
extending 
their 
economic and social 
participation 
Action 7 
In 2017, develop a programme 
of 
actions to enable the Cork region to 
attract former residents to return 
Action 8 
In 2016, develop a programme of 
actions to enable the Cork region to be 
attractive for in-migration 

163
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To maximise employment and income levels within the Cork region by supporting 
the programme of actions set out in the South West Region Action Plan for Jobs 
2015 – 2017. 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 
2017, 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
employment 
related 
actions 
to 
increase the attraction of the Cork 
region 
in 
retaining 
its 
recently 
emerged 
and 
emerging workforce 
Employment 
&  
Income 
Action 2 
In 
2017, 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
employment 
related 
actions 
to 
increase the attraction for in-migration 
to the Cork region of economically active 
persons 
Place 
Action 5 
By 2018, to advise and assist the Urban 
Cork and Rural Cork Asset Management 
Groups in their completion of an audit of 
existing employment premises / facilities 
and in their development of a system of 
on-going monitoring 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, to advise 
the 
Physical 
Infrastructure 
Asset 
Management Group as to the protection 
and 
enhancement 
of 
Cork’s 
key 
employment related infrastructure assets   
Action 8 
In 2016, to develop a programme of priority actions for Cork arising from the South West Region Action 
Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017. 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
In 
2017, 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
actions to 
facilitate 
employees 
who 
desire 
to 
extend their employment 
participation 
In 2017, to advise the Human Capital and Education 
Asset Management Groups in their identification of 
the key educational and skills needs required to meet 
the future economic and employment vision for the 
Cork region, as well as developing a programme of 
actions to facilitate collaboration between educational 
institutions and industry in the delivery of strategic 
programmes and research at third level. 
Action 7 
By 2017, in collaboration with the Urban 
Cork and Rural Cork Asset Management 
Groups, to develop a programme of 
actions to ensure the provision of a 
suitable choice of employment premises 
choice, by location, type and cost 
Action 9 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to increase the per capita income for the Cork region 
Action 4 
Action 10 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Employment Index to monitor and measure the key 
employment attributes of the Cork region

164
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To promote Urban Cork as the key economic regional driver and to protect it from 
developing inefficiently, in order to retain its economic competitiveness. 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing 
residential stock and to develop a system 
of on-going monitoring 
Lead 
Agency 
Urban 
Cork 
Action 2 
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing 
employment premises / facilities and to 
develop a system of on-going monitoring 
Place 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
continue to advocate for, and facilitate, 
regional collaboration by local authorities, 
key stakeholders and delivery agencies  
Action 6 
On adoption of the planned for National 
Planning Framework  and Regional Spatial 
and Economic Strategy, and in conjunction 
with the Rural Cork Asset Management 
Group, Cork City Council and other key 
stakeholders, develop a sustainable Cork 
spatial vision that will give effect to 
population growth targets set for Cork 
whilst ensuring the protection of natural 
environmental resources. This spatial vision 
for the Cork region will be consistent with 
the future NPF and RSES
Action 7 
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard to the targets for Cork as set out in the future National Planning 
Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the Rural Cork Asset Management 
Group, Cork City Council and other key stakeholders, develop a sustainable spatial and transportation plan with the 
requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with the programmes 
of infrastructure delivery agencies. The outputs of this spatial and transportation plan for the Cork region will be 
consistent with the future NPF and RSES
Vision 
Action 3 
By 2017, in collaboration with the 
Housing Asset Management Group and 
the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, 
to develop a programme of actions to 
ensure the provision of housing choice to 
residents, by location, type and cost 
Action 4 
By 2017, in collaboration with the 
Employment 
/ 
Income 
Assets 
Management Group and the Rural Cork 
Asset Management Group, to develop a 
programme of actions to ensure the 
provision 
of 
a 
suitable 
choice 
of 
employment 
premises 
choice, 
by 
location, type and cost 
Action 8 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Urban Cork Index to monitor and measure the key socio-
economic performance of Urban Cork 

165
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To promote Rural Cork as a key environmental, economic and social asset, to 
reverse depopulation where it continues to occur and to efficiently and sustainably 
manage growing rural area 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing 
residential stock and to develop a system 
of on-going monitoring 
Lead 
Agency 
Rural 
Cork 
Action 2 
By 2017, to complete an audit of 
existing 
employment 
premises 
/ 
facilities and to develop a system of on-
going monitoring 
Place 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
continue to advocate for, and facilitate, 
regional collaboration by local authorities, 
key stakeholders and delivery agencies  
Action 6 
On adoption of the planned for National 
Planning Framework and Regional Spatial 
and 
Economic 
Strategy, 
and 
in 
conjunction with the Urban Cork Asset 
Management 
Group, 
develop 
a 
sustainable Cork spatial vision that will 
give effect to the population growth 
targets set for Cork. whilst ensuring the 
protection of natural environmental 
resources. 
Action 7 
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard to the targets for Cork as set out in the future National 
Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the Urban 
Cork Asset Management Group, develop a sustainable spatial and transportation plan compatible with 
the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats Directives for the Cork region, to be co-ordinated with 
the programmes of infrastructure delivery agencies.
Vision 
Action 3 
By 2016, in collaboration with the 
Housing Assets Management Group and 
the Urban Cork Asset Management 
Group, to develop a programme of 
actions to ensure the provision of 
housing choice to residents, by location, 
type and cost 
Action 4 
By 
2017, 
collaboration 
with 
the 
Employment 
/ 
Income 
Assets 
Management Group and the Urban Cork 
Asset Management Group, to develop a 
programme of actions to ensure the 
provision 
of 
a 
suitable 
choice 
of 
employment 
premises 
choice, 
by 
location, type and cost 
Action 8 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Rural Cork Index to monitor and measure the key socio-
economic performance of Rural Cork 

166
 Local Economic And Community Plan
To identify and promote actions that will enhance Cork’s physical and technological connectivity 
and 
to 
develop 
sustainable 
and 
flexible 
connectivity 
options 
that
can adapt to the changing needs of business and the community - locally, regionally, nationally and 
internationally in a manner that is compatible with protection and sustainable management of our 
natural resources.    
Opportunity 
Action 1 
During the lifetime of this plan, advocate for 
and support the roll out to all areas of County 
Cork the broadband connectivity planned for 
within the Government’s National Broadband 
Plan
Connectivity 
Action 2 
By 2019, to complete an audit of all existing 
telecommunications infrastructure within the 
Cork region and to develop a system of on-going 
monitoring 
Place 
By 2018, to develop a sustainable regional 
transport plan for Cork County and a programme 
of actions toward the creation of a regional 
transport network that
a)will provide real choice to residents as to how 
they travel and how they construct their 
journeys within Cork; b)that facilitates the 
efficient interaction of Cork County, Cork Ring 
and Metropolitan Cork transport assets; c)that 
facilitates the efficient interaction of road, bus, 
rail, air and marine transport infrastructure; and 
d)that accommodates industry needs regarding 
the movement of materials, goods and people.  
The plan and programme of actions will be 
prepared in a manner which is compatible with 
the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats 
Directives. This transport plan should be 
developed in conjunction with the Southern 
Regional Assembly and Cork City Council.
Action 7 
On adoption of the planned for National 
Planning Framework and Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with the 
Rural Cork Asset Management Group, develop 
a sustainable Cork spatial vision that will give 
effect to population growth targets set for Cork 
whilst ensuring the protection of natural 
environmental resources. 
Action 9 
In 2016, to develop a programme of priority actions for Cork arising from the South West Region 
Action Plan for Jobs 2015 – 2017. 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
By 2019, to complete an audit of all existing 
transport infrastructure within the Cork region 
and to develop a system of on-going monitoring 
Action 4 
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions 
that will facilitate increased usage of public 
transport by all residents within the Cork region 
Action 8 
Within the lifetime of this plan, having regard 
to and compatible with the targets for Cork as 
set out in the future National Planning 
Framework 
and 
Regional 
Spatial 
and 
Economic Strategy, and in conjunction with 
the Rural Cork Asset Management Group, 
develop 
a 
sustainable 
spatial 
and 
transportation plan compatible with the 
requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats 
Directives for the Cork region, to be co-
ordinated 
with 
the 
programmes 
of 
infrastructure 
delivery 
agencies.
Action 10 
Within the lifetime of this plan develop a Cork Connectivity Index that will identify, measure and monitor the local, 
regional, national and international connectivity of Cork 
Action 5 
By 2019, to develop a targeted transport 
strategy (strategic vision) that will identify 
medium to long term actions to reduce travel 
times between Cork and Dublin and between 
Cork and London , as well as with identified 
regional Gateways and Hubs (e.g. Limerick, 
Waterford, Mallow, and Tralee-Killarney).
Asset Management Goal 

167
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will remove socio-economic barriers and 
enhance the sustainability of all communities within Cork 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to complete a geographical audit of all 
communities, set out by both activity and 
Municipal District This audit should identify 
barriers (facilities, operational, etc.) experienced 
by those communities identified.
Lead 
Agency 
Community 
Action 2 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of 
actions 
to 
encourage 
and 
facilitate 
enhanced 
civic 
and 
community 
engagement 
Place 
Action 4 
In 2017, to identify communities that 
are 
endangered 
and 
to 
develop 
a 
programme of actions to support their 
needs 
Action 5 
To 
advocate 
on 
behalf 
of 
communities regarding local and regional 
policy 
development 
and 
its 
implementation 
Action 7 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding community 
reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District 
Vision 
Action 3 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of actions 
to 
enhance 
the 
ability 
of 
communities to shape their futures 
Action 8
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Communities Index that will identify, measure and 
monitor the socio-economic wellbeing of communities within Cork 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, identify social 
needs that could be clarified further by appropriate 
research that would empower local communities 
to develop solutions to local issues or exploit 
sustainable development opportunities.  

168
 Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will remove barriers to education for 
residents at all life stages, and to target in particular the future educational needs 
of our planned for employment growth sectors  
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, in conjunction with the Human Capital 
Asset Management Group, to identify the key 
educational needs required to reflect the social 
characteristics that we value most within the 
Cork region 
Education 
Action 2 
By 2018, in collaboration with educational 
institutions, to develop a programme of actions 
to facilitate access to further education by all 
residents who desire to do so 
Place 
Action 7 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions, 
relating to transport, accommodation, etc., that 
will facilitate access by students to education 
facilities 
Action 8 
During 
the 
lifetime 
of 
this 
plan, 
in 
collaboration with the local authorities and 
the Dept. of Education, to identify a 
programme of actions that will facilitate the 
enhancement 
of 
existing 
primary 
and 
secondary educational facilities and the 
delivery of new facilities in a manner that 
maximises the investment benefits 
Action 11 
Over the lifetime of this plan, to reduce the percentage of 18-24 year olds with at most lower secondary education 
and not in further education and training to 8%; to increase the share of 30-34 year olds who have completed 
tertiary or equivalent education to at least 60% 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
By 2018, in collaboration with educational 
institutions, to develop a programme of actions 
to minimise costs to residents in accessing 
education 
Action 9 
During the lifetime of this plan, in collaboration 
with 
third 
level 
and 
further 
education 
institutions, to develop a programme of actions 
that will facilitate UCC, CIT and other 
educational institutions in developing and 
enhancing their campuses 
Action 12 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop an Education Index to monitor and measure the key 
education attainments and experiences of Cork residents 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions relating to the education 
sector that will support the work of the South 
West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017  
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions to continue to promote 
the importance of early intervention in 
education, including the role played by parents  
Action 10 
By 2018, to identify a programme of actions that 
will support UCC and CIT in enhancing their 
international educational rankings 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, recognise the important 
social and economic role played by entrepreneurship by 
developing a programme of actions to further support and 
enhance entrepreneurial education and enterprise 
development within Cork. 

169
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will create and sustain a culture and 
environment of innovation, resulting in a high functioning research eco-system 
within Cork that facilitates enterprise to flourish within the region 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions relating to the RDI sector in the 
Cork 
region 
that 
will 
support 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
South 
West 
Region 
Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017  
Research, 
Development 
& 
Innovation 
Action 2 
In 
2017, 
within 
the 
context 
of 
our 
existing centres of excellence and building on 
successes to 
date, 
identify 
further 
RDI 
opportunities within the Cork region 
Place 
Action 8 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions that 
will facilitate the retention and attraction of 
researchers to the Cork region 
Action 9 
By 2018, in collaboration with the Connectivity 
Asset Management Group and in order to 
enhance research opportunities, to develop a 
programme of actions to facilitate the creation 
of a physical network of research facilities 
within the Cork region 
Action 14 
Within the lifetime of this plan, support the Data Co-Ordination Asset Management Group in the establishment of 
a centralised data centre or data hub, to facilitate the delivery and sharing of public information and datasets 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions for the Cork 
region focused on the delivery of the 14 Priority Areas for 
Government Investment in Research 2013-2017 – and 
beyond (amended as required on implementation of 
Innovation2020) 
During the lifetime of this plan, to engage with 
and support the Regional Innovation Forum to 
be established under the South West Region 
Action 10 
During the lifetime of this plan, and in 
collaboration 
with 
the 
local 
authorities, 
landowners 
and 
infrastructure 
delivery 
agencies, to support the development of the 
Cork Science and Innovation Park to serve the 
Cork region 
Action 15 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish an RDI Index that 
identifies, and commences the measurement of, key performance 
indicators for the RDI sector 
Action 5 
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions 
that will enhance the commercialisation of 
research within the Cork region 
Action 11 
In 2017, building on successes to date in this 
sector, develop a programme of actions that 
will meet the demand for incubation spaces and 
hot desk facilities within the Cork region 
Action 12 
In 2017, to identify a programme of actions that 
will support research institutions in maximising 
their ability to attract research funding 
Action 6
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a programme 
of actions to provide support for entrepreneurs (both 
start-ups and existing companies), to allow companies to 
develop within their own locations. 
Action 13
In 2017, to identify a programme of actions that will support 
research institutions in maximising their ability to attract 
research funding across all disciplines
Action 4 
Action 7
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a programme of 
actions to further support and enhance international 
collaborations between researchers and research 
institutions based in Cork 
Action 16 
During the lifetime of this plan, develop a 
programme of actions to complement the future 
recommendations of the Irish Research Council 
for the implementation of Innovation 2020, with 
particular focus on the promotion and facilitation 
of inter-disciplinary collaboration and interaction. 

170
 Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will provide for sustainable stock and housing choice that enables the 
people of Cork, now and in the future, to have attractive places to live, suited to their needs and at costs that they 
can afford whilst ensuring the protection of natural environmental resources and in a manner that is compatible 
with the requirements of the Birds and Habitats Directives
Opportunity 
Action 1 
During the lifetime of this plan to develop a 
programme of actions to assist in the delivery 
of the Cork Joint Housing Strategy 2013 and the 
housing 
objectives 
of 
the 
Cork 
County 
Development Plan 2014 
Housing 
Action 2 
During the lifetime of this plan to inform and 
collaborate with the Physical Infrastructure and 
Connectivity Asset Management Groups, to 
ensure that the physical infrastructure needs 
required to facilitate housing provision are 
adequately met whilst ensuring the protection 
of natural environmental resources and in a 
manner 
that 
is 
compatible 
with 
the 
requirements of the Birds and Habitats 
Directives
Place 
Action 6 
By 2018, to assist the Rural Cork and Urban 
Cork Asset Management Groups in their 
completion of  an audit of existing residential 
stock and in their development of a system of 
on-going monitoring 
Action 7 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions that will maximise 
housing choice – by type and location – to 
residents within the Cork region whilst ensuring 
the 
protection 
of 
natural 
environmental 
resources and in a manner that is compatible 
with the requirements of the Birds and Habitats 
Directives
Action 10 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding housing provision 
reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
On publication of the key outputs from the 
National Planning Strategy and the Regional 
Spatial and Economic Strategy, develop a 
programme of actions to inform a future 
revision of the Cork Joint Housing Strategy 
2013 to have regard to the future NSF and 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions that will contribute to the 
provision of a sustainable consistent supply of 
housing to serve the Cork region
Action 8 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions that will contribute to the 
provision of high quality housing within the Cork 
region 
Action 11 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Housing Index that identifies, and commences the measurement of, 
permanent key performance indicators for the housing sector within the Cork region 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions that will minimise the 
costs – direct and indirect - to residents 
accessing housing within the Cork region 
Action 9 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
vernacular building standards that have a low 
environmental impact, both in construction and 
use, and are appropriate to our climate.

171
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate sustainable actions that will protect and enhance 
Cork’s existing physical infrastructure assets, by identifying the future physical 
infrastructural needs of the region 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
During the lifetime of this plan and via ongoing 
consultation, 
ensure 
that 
the 
physical 
infrastructure 
needs 
of 
businesses 
and 
communities 
are 
adequately met in 
a manner which is compatible with protecting the 
natural environmental resources of the County.
Physical 
Infrastructure 
Action 2 
During the lifetime of this plan and via 
ongoing consultation, ensure that pricing 
and supply certainty regarding physical 
infrastructure provision to meet the 
needs of businesses and communities are 
appropriately met 
Place 
Action 5 
By 2018, to complete an audit of all 
existing physical infrastructure and to 
develop a system of on-going monitoring 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
develop a programme of actions that will 
maximise socio-economic gains from 
physical infrastructure investment in a 
manner 
which 
is 
compatible 
with 
protecting the natural environmental 
resources of the County.
Action 9 
Within the lifetime of this plan and having regard to the outputs of the National Planning Strategy 
and Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy, to collaborate with the Rural Cork and Urban Cork Asset 
Management Groups in their development of a sustainable spatial and transportation plan 
compatible with the requirements of the SEA, Birds and Habitats Directives for the Cork region, to be 
co-ordinated with the programmes of infrastructure delivery agencies. The outputs of this spatial and 
transportation plan for the Cork region will be consistent with the future NPF and RSES
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, advocate for and 
identify opportunities for the advance provision of 
physical infrastructure to serve the community and 
economic needs of the Cork region in a manner which 
is 
compatible 
with 
protecting 
the 
natural 
environmental resources of the County..
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, to support 
and contribute to the development of 
smart infrastructure within the Cork 
region in a manner which is compatible 
with protecting the natural environmental 
resources of the County.
Action 7 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
continue to advocate for, and facilitate, 
regional 
collaboration 
by 
local 
authorities, key stakeholders and delivery 
agencies 
in 
the 
area 
of 
physical 
infrastructure provision 
Action 10 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Physical Infrastructure Index to measure and monitor 
Cork’s regional physical infrastructure 
Action 8 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of  actions to avoid 
increasing flood risk , as well as identifying 
interventions that will both reduce flood 
risk and improve the natural environment

172
 Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will ensure the long-term net 
consequences on the natural environment (locally and globally), as well as on our 
personal and social well-being, are considered through the management of Cork’s 
Opportunity 
Natural 
Environment 
&  
Climate Change 
Action 2 
By 2018, to complete an audit of Cork’s 
natural infrastructure and to develop a 
programme of actions to monitor same 
Place 
Action 4 
By 2018, to develop a programme of 
actions to mitigate harmful emissions 
from within the Cork region, set within 
the context of the future National 
Mitigation Plan for Ireland 
Action 5 
In 2017, to advise Cork County Council 
in its 
development 
of 
a 
Local 
Climate 
Change 
Adaption 
Plan in 
order to facilitate the future proofing 
the natural and 
built 
infrastructure 
supporting the Cork region 
Action 7 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Natural Environment and Climate Change Index to 
monitor and measure the environmental performance and climate related future proofing of the 
Cork region 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 6 
In 2017, in consultation with the 
Connectivity Asset Management Group, 
to identify a programme of actions to 
support the creation of urban green 
corridors to facilitate the non-motorised 
movement of people and other species 
within the Cork urban environment 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions to support Cork 
becoming a centre for excellence in climate 
change 
mitigation 
and/or 
emissions 
reductions
Action 8 
During the lifetime of this plan, to identify land use policies that will enhance carbon sequestration, 
woodland regeneration, retention of bogs and flood relief. 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, support the 
implementation within Cork County of the 
National Biodiversity Plan & the National 
Pollinator Plan.
Action 1 
In 2018, to develop a programme 
of actions to promote the critical role 
that 
our 
natural 
environment 
plays 
in 
supporting our collective 
endeavours and in supporting our Key 
Assets  

173
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will reduce Cork’s overall energy usage, 
increase the proportional usage of non-fossil based fuels generated within the 
region and promote Cork’s overall potential within the energy sector 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
Within the lifetime of this plan, in 
collaboration with key stakeholders, 
and, within the context of the policies 
set down in Ireland’s Transition to a Low 
Carbon Energy Future 2015-2030, draft 
a Strategic Energy Plan for the Cork 
region that will identify a range of 
actions required to achieve increased 
energy efficiencies and increased local 
sources of sustainable energy, within 
medium term targets set out for the 
region.   
Lead 
Agency 
Energy 
Action 2 
Place 
Action 3 
In 2016, to develop a programme of 
policies to minimise the usage of energy in 
the 
residential, 
industrial 
and 
transportation use within the Cork region 
Action 5 
Within the lifetime of this plan, and in conjunction with the Department of Transport Tourism and 
Sport, to develop and monitor a Passenger Index for Cork Airport 
Vision 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, to identify a 
programme of land use policies and actions to 
support 
renewable 
energy 
generation, 
including micro-generation, subject to normal 
land use planning considerations.region 
By 2018, in collaboration with Cork’s 
energy-based research institutions, to 
draft 
a 
scoping 
report 
on 
the 
development of an Energy Research Plan 
for the Cork region, to maximise the 
energy-based research potential within 
Cork

174
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To support the development of internationally focused cluster eco-systems in the 
Cork region 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
Via institutional research, to develop 
targeted policy actionable at a regional 
level with a focus on developing a Cluster 
Strategy for Cork that is cognisant of 
internationalisation, innovation, product 
development 
and 
research 
commercialisation.  
Action 2 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of actions relating to clustering in the 
Cork region 
that 
will 
support 
the 
implementation of the South 
West 
Region 
Action Plan for Jobs 
2015-2017  
Place 
Action 3 
By 2018, in collaboration with the 
Connectivity Asset Management Group 
and 
in 
order 
to 
enhance 
cluster 
opportunities, to develop a programme 
of actions to facilitate the creation of a 
physical network that will enable the 
creation of interactions and clusters 
within the Cork region 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Cluster Index that identifies, and commences the 
measurement of, key performance indicators for the cluster sector 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Clustering 

175
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will provide for increased exports from the Cork region, by 
growing existing exports sectors and developing new export sectors 
Opportunity 
During the lifetime of this plan - in 
collaboration with local authorities, economic 
agencies (such as IDA, EI, etc) and the Irish 
Exporters 
Association 
- 
to 
develop 
a 
programme of actions to continue to assist 
Cork exporters in identifying international 
markets for their goods and services 
Action 2  
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to 
reduce costs – direct and indirect - to Cork 
exporters in accessing international markets 
with their goods and services 
Place 
Action 7 
In 2017, to develop a programme of location-
based actions that will protect and enhance 
existing export sectors operational within the 
Cork region, with particular reference to 
safeguarding and growing rural export-based 
activities  
Action 8 
By 2018, to identify Cork’s export sector 
transport and logistics needs, as well as 
opportunities, to maximise access to markets 
and 
overall 
cost 
competitiveness 
– 
in 
collaboration with the work of the Connectivity 
Asset Management Group 
Action 9 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the overall relative export value of goods and services from 
the Cork region  
Vision 
Action 3  
During the lifetime of this plan - in 
collaboration 
with 
local 
authorities, 
educational institutions, economic agencies 
(such as IDA, EI, etc) and the Irish Exporters 
Association – to develop a programme of 
actions to protect and enhance the existing 
export sectors operating within the Cork region 
Action 4  
During the lifetime of this plan - in collaboration 
with educational institutions and economic 
agencies (such as IDA, EI, etc) – to seek to 
identify potential new export sectors within the 
Cork region  
Action 10 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan a decrease in the overall relative costs associated with exporting goods and 
services from the Cork region 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions relating to the export 
sector that will support the work of the South 
West Region Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017  
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Export 
Markets 
Action 11 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish an Export Index that identifies, and commences the measurement of, 
key performance indicators for the export sector.  
Action 1  
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop a 
programme of actions to provide access to existing 
regional collaboration agreements for companies, 
developed by local authorities, chambers of 
commerce, third level colleges and incubators. 

176
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will grow Cork’s domestic and international 
tourism visitors and increase revenue accruing from same  
Opportunity 
Action 1 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of actions that will inform 
and support the work of Visit Cork Ltd., as 
set out in Growing Tourism in Cork – A 
Collective Strategy 2015 - 2020 
Place 
Action 2 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
develop a programme of actions that will 
facilitate the development of a tourism 
network for the Cork region, via the 
alignment of actions of other Asset 
Management Groups and with the work 
of Visit Cork Ltd. 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Tourism Index that identifies, and commences the 
measurement of, key performance indicators for the tourism sector.   
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Tourism 

177
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To minimise the cost of living for residents of Cork, benchmarked nationally and 
internationally 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2016, to develop a programme of 
actions that will increase efficiencies and 
reduce costs across the range of goods 
and services provided within Cork, 
achieving during the lifetime of this plan 
a reduction in the overall cost of living for 
resident’s (index linked to inflation) 
Lead 
Agency 
Cost 
Of 
Living 
Place 
Action 2 
By 2018, to develop a programme of 
actions that will target reductions in the 
costs to Cork residents of the three 
principle disposable income expenditures 
- housing, transport and food 
Action 3 
In 2016, to develop a Cork Cost of Living 
Survey that will monitor the cost of access 
by residents to all key services that 
contribute to Cork’s cost of living 
competitiveness 
Action 4 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding cost of living 
reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District. 
Vision 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Cost of Living Index that identifies, and commences 
the measurement of, key performance indicators relating to cost of living within the Cork region   

178
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will protect and enhance Cork Airport’s key 
role in the economic and social development of the Cork region 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of 
actions to expand the revenue 
base of Cork Airport in order to underpin 
its future growth 
Lead 
Agency 
Cork 
Airport 
Action 2 
Place 
Action 5 
Within the lifetime of this plan, and in conjunction with the Department of Transport Tourism and 
Sport, to develop and monitor a Passenger Index for Cork Airport 
Vision 
During the lifetime of this plan, in 
collaboration with the Tourism and 
Employment Income Asset Management 
Groups, to develop a programme of 
actions to progress enhanced air services 
to locations that are most critical to 
Cork’s future economic vision
Action 4 
In 
2017, 
to 
engage 
with 
the 
local 
authorities 
and 
key 
stakeholders 
to 
develop 
a 
programme 
of 
actions 
to 
progress 
the objectives set out in the Special 
Local Area Plan for Cork Airport 
Action 3 
In 
2017, 
to 
engage 
with 
key 
transport stakeholders to develop a 
programme 
of 
actions 
to 
enhance 
transport 
connectivity 
between 
Cork 
Airport 
campus 
and 
the 
Metropolitan 
Cork 
transport 
network, 
with 
particular 
emphasis 
on 
public 
transport 
connectivity 

179
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To promote and co-ordinate actions that will maximise the regional socio-economic 
potential of Cork Harbour by aligning the economic, environmental, social and 
cultural needs of this integrated area 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to draft a SWOT analysis of Cork 
Harbour and its immediate hinterland, set 
within the context of the NPF and RSES 
outcomes 
Lead 
Agency 
Cork 
Harbour 
Action 2 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of actions to protect and 
enhance the economic, cultural and social 
capacities of the Cork harbour area 
Place 
Action 4 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of actions to protect and 
enhance 
the 
natural 
and 
built 
environment of the Cork harbour area 
Action 5 
Within the lifetime of this plan, in 
collaboration 
with 
the 
Connectivity 
Assets Management Group, to develop a 
programme of actions to enhance 
connectivity between the Cork Harbour 
area and Metropolitan Cork and, in 
particular, enhancing public transport 
and water-based connections 
Action 6 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Harbour Index that identifies, and commences the 
measurement of, permanent key performance indicators for Cork Harbour.   
Vision 
Action 3 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of actions to facilitate the 
relocation of industries from the Upper 
Harbour area 

180
 Local Economic And Community Plan
 
 
 
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will enhance the physical and mental health 
and wellbeing of Cork residents.  
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, building upon existing collaborative 
initiatives, to develop a programme of actions 
to guide inter-agency action in improving the 
health and wellbeing, physical and mental, of 
residents  
Health 
Action 2 
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions to 
remove barriers for residents in accessing 
health 
services, 
leading 
to 
equality 
of 
opportunity in the health sector for all 
residents 
Place 
Action 5 
By 2018, to complete an audit of existing health 
related facilities and to develop a system of on-
going monitoring 
Action 6 
In 2017, in collaboration with the Urban 
Cork, 
Rural Cork and Community Asset 
Management 
Groups, 
to 
develop 
a 
programme of actions to enhance the role 
that our physical and natural environments 
can play in facilitating a healthy region 
Action 8 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding our overall health 
reported to the National Census Survey by residents within each Municipal District. 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 3 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to 
identify and address strategic health threats to 
residents  
Action 9 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding our overall health 
reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District. 
Action 4 
In 2017, to develop a programme of actions to 
empower individuals and communities in 
contributing to the creation of a healthy region  
Action 10 
In 2017, having regard to existing health surveys and indicators, to identify a programme of actions to establish a 
Cork Health Index that will measure and monitor the health of residents within the Cork region 
Action 7 
During the lifetime of this plan, support Actions 
32-37 of the National Physical Activity Plan to 
facilitate people in choosing active travel as an 
everyday mode of transport. 

181
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions which support Family and Home Life as a key 
conduit for the development of Human Capital and as an important destination for 
our collective life endeavours.  
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, in collaboration with the 
Education Asset Management Group, to 
develop a programme of actions to 
continue to promote and enhance the 
key role played by parents / guardians in 
terms of early intervention regarding 
education and life skills  
Lead 
Agency 
Family  
&  
Home Life 
Action 2 
By 2018, in collaboration with the Cost of 
Living Asset Management Group, to 
develop a programme of actions to reduce 
the financial costs associated with Family 
and Home Life 
Place 
Action 3 
By 2017, inform the outputs of the Rural 
Cork, Urban Cork, Social Activities and 
Housing Asset Management Groups, by 
developing a programme of actions that 
will lead to the provision of housing and 
public realm that facilitates the needs of 
Family and Home Life 
Action 5 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding Family and 
Home Life reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each Municipal District. 
Vision 
Action 3 
In 2016, in collaboration with the 
Employment Asset Management Group, 
to develop a programme of actions to 
facilitate engagement with employment 
that is compatible with a healthy and 
productive Family and Home Life 
Action 4 
In 2016, to develop a programme of 
actions to remove barriers for families in 
accessing support services  
Action 4 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Family and Home Life Index to monitor and measure the 
key performance indicators of Cork’s Family and Home Life environment 
Action 4 
By 
2017, 
inform 
the 
outputs 
of 
the 
Connectivity 
and 
Physical 
Infrastructure 
Asset 
Management 
Groups, 
by 
developing 
a 
programme of actions that will lead to 
the 
provision 
of 
transport 
that 
facilitates the needs of Family and 
Home Life 

182
 Local Economic And Community Plan
 
 
 
 
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that value every resident equally and contribute to 
reducing the number of persons in Cork experiencing consistent poverty, risk of 
poverty and social / economic exclusion 
Action 1 
In 2017, and in consultation with 
the 
Employment/Income 
and 
the 
Education Asset Management Groups, 
to develop a programme 
of 
actions 
to 
facilitate 
equality of opportun ity 
to all residents in accessing employment 
and education 
Social 
Inclusion 
In 2017, building on the suite of 
interventions already in place, to develop 
a programme of priority actions to assist 
those Cork residents who are excluded 
from participating in the workforce 
education and civic engagementeducation  
Place 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, to 
develop a programme of actions that 
result in an improvement in recorded 
deprivation levels in Cork (as measured 
by the HP Deprivation Index) and 
particularly in those areas recorded as 
disadvantaged or very disadvantaged 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan, in 
consultation with the Connectivity Asset 
Management 
Group, 
to 
develop 
a 
programme of actions to address the 
physical isolation of residents within the 
Cork region  
Action 5 
To achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction relating to civic 
engagement and sense of community reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within 
each Municipal District 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 6 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Social Inclusion Index to monitor and measure social 
inclusion within the Cork region 
Opportunity 
Action 2 

183
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will contribute to Cork’s reputation as a high 
quality place to live and work for persons of all cultural backgrounds 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 
2017, 
to 
undertake 
a 
multi-
culture related behaviours and attitudes 
survey of existing residents 
Action 2 
In 2017, to identify a programme of 
actions to promote the social and 
economic benefits of multiculturalism 
Place 
Action 3 
In 2017, to identify policies and actions 
that will enhance the experiences of 
cultural minorities living and working in 
Cork 
Action 4 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of satisfaction regarding overall quality 
of life reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents originally from abroad living within each 
Municipal District 
Vision 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Multiculturism Index that identifies, and commences the 
measurement of, key performance indicators of Cork’s regional multiculturalism 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Multi-
Culturalism 

184
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will enhance access and quality of engagement 
of Cork residents to social activities 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to complete an audit of public 
and 
private 
social 
and 
amenity 
infrastructure available for use by Cork 
residents and to develop a programme of 
monitoring of same 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 2 
In 2017, to develop and undertake 
a 
residents’ survey to establish the 
barriers that exist to their engaging 
with social activities  
Place 
Action 3 
In 2018, to develop a programme 
of 
actions 
to 
meet 
the 
identified 
needs of residents and communities in 
accessing their preferred social activities 
Action 4 
In 2018, to develop a programme of 
actions to identify where shared provision 
can maximise access by residents and 
communities to their preferred social 
activities
Action 5 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of engagement and satisfaction 
regarding social activities reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each 
Municipal District 
Vision 
Action 6 
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Social Activities Index that will identify, measure and 
monitor the availability and quality of social activities to Cork residents.  
Social 
Activities 

185
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will enhance access and quality of engagement 
of Cork residents with all cultural activities 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
By 2018, to complete an audit of all arts, 
heritage 
and 
culture 
infrastructure 
available for use by Cork residents, to 
underpin the identification of barriers to 
residents accessing arts and culture 
By 2018, to develop a programme of actions 
to enhance the arts, heritage and culture 
offering within the Cork region including 
mutual understanding and inclusivity
Place 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a programme of actions to create and 
promote a regional network of arts, 
heritage and culture facilities within the 
Cork region 
During the lifetime of this plan, to develop 
a 
programme 
of 
actions 
to 
assist 
community and volunteer groups in their 
supporting role in the development and 
maintenance of cork’s arts, heritage and 
cultural assets
Action 5 
Achieve during the lifetime of this plan an increase in the levels of engagement and satisfaction 
regarding arts and culture reported to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by residents within each 
Municipal District 
Vision 
Action 6 
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Culture Index that will identify, measure and 
monitor the availability and quality of arts, heritage and culture in the Cork region 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Arts, 
Heritage 
and 
Culture 
Action 2 
Action 4 

186
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will enhance security – personal and property 
related – within the Cork region 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of actions that will reduce the incentive 
for acts of crime to occur within the 
Cork region  
Action 2 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of 
actions 
that 
will 
increase 
the 
detection and prosecution rates relating 
to acts of crime occurring within the Cork 
region  
Place 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this, to achieve an 
increase in the level of security reported 
to the Cork Quality of Life Survey by 
residents within each Municipal District. 
Action 5 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Security Index that identifies, and commences the 
measurement of, permanent key performance indicators for security within the Cork region  
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Security 
Action 3 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of actions that will contribute to the 
feeling of 
security 
among 
residents 
within the Cork region  

187
Local Economic And Community Plan
 
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will enhance Cork’s reputation as a location 
where regulation is applied effectively, and, where ease of doing business is 
facilitated 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2018, and in collaboration with key 
regulatory agencies and key stakeholders, 
develop a programme of actions to 
enhance Cork’s regulatory environment 
within 
the 
economic, 
social 
and 
environmental sectors 
Regulatory 
Environment 
Action 2 
In By 2018, and in collaboration with key 
regulatory agencies and key stakeholders, 
develop a programme of actions to 
identify specific opportunities for inter-
agency co-operation in the regulatory 
sector 
Place 
Action 3 
In 
2017, 
to 
identify 
the 
key 
regulatory 
functions 
undertaken 
within 
the 
Cork 
region and their 
linkages to enterprise and communities 
Action 4 
In 2017, to develop a programme 
of 
actions 
to 
identify 
where 
enhanced 
technology 
application 
can 
benefit 
regulatory 
functions 
within the Cork region 
Action 6 
Within the lifetime of this plan, develop a Cork Regulatory Index that will identify, 
measure and monitor regulatory performance within the Cork region 
Vision 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Lead 
Agency 
Action 5 
By 2018, to undertake a comparative 
analysis with the regulatory performance 
of internationally competitive regions to 
Cork 

188
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
On establishment, to become the Cork 
Asset Management Forum in order to 
promote the protection of the socio-
economic values which underpin the Cork 
region 
Lead 
Agency 
Values 
Place 
Action 2 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to 
organise the first Cork Quality of Life 
Forum event to stimulate socio-economic 
discussions within the region and to 
inform our future collective community 
and economic endeavours 
Action 3 
To update and undertake the Cork Quality of Life Survey on a five year cycle 
Vision 
Asset Management Goal 
To promote the continued identification, socialisation and protection of the socio-
economic values which underpin the Cork region 

189
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify and promote actions that will expand, enhance and protect stakeholder 
relationships within the Cork region 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, to become the Cork Asset 
Management 
Co-Ordination 
Group 
to 
oversee and coordinate the actions and 
outputs of all Asset Management Groups 
Lead 
Agency 
Institutional 
Relationships 
Place 
Action 2 
In 2017, building on existing relationships 
and initiatives, to develop a programme 
of actions to protect and enhance 
existing 
regional, 
national 
and 
international institutional relationships, 
and, 
to 
develop 
new 
institutional 
relationships  
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, to establish a Cork Institutional Relationships Index that identifies, and 
commences the measurement of, the nature and extent of productive institutional relationships within 
the Cork region  
Vision 

190
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To identify, promote and co-ordinate actions to collect, organise and share data 
relevant to Cork’s Key Assets 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 
2017, 
to 
identify 
and 
agree 
with relevant agencies, a roadmap to 
achieve collective 
alignment 
in 
the 
collection, sharing and presentation of 
data 
by 
all 
public 
bodies 
and 
stakeholders within the Cork region  
Lead 
Agency 
Data Co-
Ordination 
Action 2 
By 2018, to develop a programme of 
actions required to create a Cork Data Hub 
as a repository of collective and aligned, 
regional data  
Place 
Action 3 
During the lifetime of this plan, establish a 
Cork Data Hub that collects, interprets and 
presents regional data centred on Cork’s 
Key Assets 
Action 4 
During the lifetime of this plan and, via 
the establishment of the Cork Data Hub 
and combining the data outputs of the 
Asset 
Management 
Groups, 
make 
available at regional and Municipal 
District levels relevant information under 
Cork’s Key Asset headings 
Action 5 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to develop a Cork Asset Index that measures and presents the 
performance of the Cork region’s Key Assets - utilising the data outputs of the Asset Management 
Groups  
Vision 

191
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Goal 
To continue and enhance the promotion of the Cork region, as commenced by the 
Cork Building Our Brand strategy 
Asset 
Management 
Group 
Opportunity 
Action 1 
In 2017, to engage with the post-LECP 
Asset Management Structures identified 
within this plan as a platform to promote 
Cork’s socio-economic offering 
Lead 
Agency 
Reputation 
& Brand 
Action 2 
During the lifetime of this plan, building on 
existing relationships and initiatives, and in 
consultation 
with 
the 
Institutional 
Relationships 
Asset 
Management Group, 
to continue to promote the Cork region, 
nationally and internationally, as an attractive 
place to live, work and trade with 
Place 
Action 3 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to inform 
the work of, and to engage with, the first 
Cork Quality of Life Forum event 
Action 4 
To inform inputs into the Cork Quality of 
Life Survey, to be conducted by the Values 
Asset Management Group 
Action 5 
Within the lifetime of this plan, to establish a methodology for the periodic monitoring of Cork’s local, 
national and international reputation 
Vision 

192
CORK ASSET MANAGEMENT 
STRUCTURES
Having identified Cork’s recommended key assets, as well as the initial management goals / actions 
for each asset, the process requires that a delivery mechanism be also identified. However, it is 
noted that – while some of the assets identified represent a renewed focus and use of differing 
language – many existing working groups are already in place that work collaboratively within these 
asset areas. This process seeks simply to build on these established relationships, such as, CASP, 
Energy Cork, Cork Smart Gateway, Joint Cork Housing Strategy, Cork Tourism Taskforce, Cork Building 
Our Brand Strategy, and many more similar collaborations within the region.
At the core of any effective architecture to protect and enhance our key assets, is the understand­
ing that no single agency or body can deliver what Cork needs and values. Our success as a region 
is wholly based on our collective endeavours and this has been a significant regional strength 
developed over the past decades.

However, neither does this process seek to restrict the ability of agencies to fulfil their own corpo­
rate vision and operational agenda. This process is not in any manner recommending the transfer 
of powers away from existing agencies, but rather to provide those agencies with shared delivery 
conduits from which they may benefit from.
 
Asset Management Groups
The mechanism offered herein recommends the formation of Asset Management Groups around 
each key asset, populated by key stakeholders, representative bodies and delivery agencies, in 
order that:
▯
▯
Asset management goals and performance indicators can be confirmed and amended 
via further plan reviews
▯
▯
Asset-specific data is identified, as required, for monitoring
▯
▯
Asset related actions can be prioritised and progressed to protect and enhance each 
Key Asset
▯
▯
The Key Asset performance is monitored and reported
▯
▯
Communication conduits are supported and enhanced between complementary agen­
cies
It is anticipated that each Asset Management Group will consist of the primary stakeholders and 
delivery agencies working in that asset area, headed by a Lead Agency (who it is envisaged already 
has a significant role in this asset area) . While many of the supporting agencies or stakeholders it 
is recommended will remain largely constant within the groups, scope exists for additional partic­
ipation to be added as may be required as issues emerge.

193
Local Economic And Community Plan
Asset Management Co-ordination
Co-ordination and cross-pollination between Asset Management Groups is also critical to effective 
delivery of actions. This co-ordinating function can be facilitated by an Asset Management Co-Or­
dination Group that it is recommended be populated by a representative of each Asset Management 
Group (the Lead Agency is recommended), as well as representatives of each of the three Local 
Community Development Committees and the Economic Strategic Policy Committee. 
This Asset Management Co-Ordination Group can deliver:
▯
▯
Overall responsibility for the monitoring and progression of Key Assets identified 
▯
▯
Ensuring co-ordination between Asset Management Groups
▯
▯
Identifying cross-cutting actions that can benefit multiple assets
▯
▯
Identifying actions that are likely to deliver greatest cost-benefit outcomes
▯
▯
Respond to the varied needs of different locations within Cork  
▯
▯
Inform the development of the Cork Asset Index
Strategic Oversight
At the strategic level, a Cork Asset Management Forum is recommended – consisting of CEOs (or 
substitutes) of key Cork public and private agencies / representative bodies to co-ordinate at the 
highest strategic level our collective focus for Cork.
This Cork Asset Management Forum can deliver:
▯
▯
This Cork Asset Management Forum can deliver:
▯
▯
Regional shared leadership
▯
▯
Protect and promote Cork’s clarity of purpose and values
▯
▯
Protect and promote Cork’s institutional relationships
▯
▯
Strategic regional guidance to overall asset management process
▯
▯
Provide inter-agency corporate alignment  
▯
▯
Oversee the development of the Cork Asset Index
▯
▯
Oversee the hosting of the periodic Cork Quality of Life Forum event
This overview role could be supported and informed by a periodic Cork Quality of Life Forum event 
that would facilitate discussion around this large socio-economic topic by all stakeholders, residents 
and representatives. Such an event, as well as being a facility to stimulate interactions, generate 
ideas and build consensus, could also be used as a significant marketing tool for the Cork region 
– similar to, or even connected with, the Global Cork Economic Forum.
Cork Asset Index
As stated above, on adoption of the final LECP it is recommended that Asset Management Groups will 
be formed to progress and monitor the performance of each asset, The monitoring outputs of each 
Asset Management Group can be relatively easily utilised to develop a Cork Asset Index (Cork AI). 
▯
▯
This Cork AI can be used to:

194
▯
▯
Monitor Cork’s Key Assets
▯
▯
Identify emerging trends within assets
▯
▯
Identify the need for additional Key Assets to be added, or, that existing assets are no 
longer relevant 
▯
▯
Promote Cork as a region with a high quality economic and social offering, under­
pinned by leadership and a collective clarity of purpose
Local Community Development Committees and Economic Strategic Policy Committee
The Local Community Development Committees (north, south and west), as area based represent­
ative and co-ordinating bodies, and the Economic Strategic Policy Committee as a countywide 
economic forum, will have a key role in determining priorities for their respective constituencies 
and sectors, via interaction with the various Asset Management Groups and the Asset Management 
Co-Ordination Group.
 
As envisaged in the Local Economic and Community Plan Guidelines issued by the Dept. of Environ­
ment, Community and Local Government, the LCDCs and the Economic SPC will have a critical 
oversight role in the progression of the key objectives (referred herein as key assets) of the LECP. 
However, recognising the reality that each objective (or asset) identified within this plan will require 
the support and collaboration of a wide spectrum of public and private agencies and stakeholders, 
it is recommended that the LCDCs and Economic SPC are supported in their work by the key region­
al delivery agencies in particular – meeting collectively as part of the Asset Management Co-Ordi­
nation Group.
It should be noted that these asset management structures are not intended to in any way replace 
the LCDCs or the Economic SPC. It is envisaged that the existing roles and duties of the LCDCs and 
Economic SPC would continue as presently constituted, but with additional support from all region­
al stakeholders and agencies. 
Asset Management
Co-Ordination 
Groups
Asset 
Management 
Forum
Employment 
/Income
Human
Capital
Urban
Cork
Rural
Cork
Education
Connectivity
Community
R+D &
Inovation
Housing
Physical
Infrastruture
Natural
Environment
& Climate
Change
Energy
Clustering
Export
Markets
Tourism
Cork
Harbour
Cork
Airport
Cost
of
Living
Health
Family &
Home-
Life
Social
Inclusion
Arts
Culture
Heritage
Multi-
Culturalism
Social
Activities
Values
Security
Regulatory
Environment
Institutional
Relationships
Data
Co-ordination
Reputation
& Brand
CORK
ASSET
INDEX
Proposed LECP Asset Management Structures
Cork Asset Management Forum is
 recommended as a strategic oversight 
group consisting of interagency senior 
management and stakeholder 
representatives 
Cork Asset Management Co-Ordination 
Group is recommended as an operational 
oversight group consisting of Econ SPC, 
LCDCs, Lead Agency and Stakeholder 
representatives
Asset Management Groups 
Comprising of stakeholder 
& delivery agencies
ACTIONS BY 
DELIVERY AGENCIES

195
Local Economic And Community Plan
LECP
High
Level
Goals
LECP
High
Level
Goals
LECP
High
Level
Goals
LECP
High
Level
Goals
LECP
High
Level
Goals
LECP
High
Level
Goals
Employment
R&D /
Innovation
Poverty &
Social
Incusion
Climate
Change & 
Energy
Education
Natural
Environment
LECP Community and Economic Objectives (Assets)
LECP Community and Economic Actions (KPIs)
EU 2020 & National Reform Programme Key Objectives
APPENDIX 1 
OVERVIEW OF LINKAGES BETWEEN EU 2020 / 
NATIONAL REFORM PROGRAMME WITH LECP 
OBJECTIVES (ASSETS)

196
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal - Employment
Employment
High Level Goal 1
Provide for a wide range of employment opportunities, across the 
county, which enable all citizens to participate fully in society and the 
economy
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Cost of Living
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2 
Provide for a physical economic network consisting of land, premises, 
facilities and supporting infrastructure
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Physical Infrastructure
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Cork Airport
TBD
TBD
Cork Harbour
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 3
Provide for a business environment and entrepreneurship that 
facilitates creation, innovation and growth within the sector
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Clustering
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 4
Promote Cork as Ireland’s Second City Region and facilitate 
population growth above the natural growth rate, increasing the local 
economic market and workforce

197
Local Economic And Community Plan
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Reputation and Brand
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Clustering
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Data Co-Ordination
TBD
TBD
Housing
TBD
TBD
Values
TBD
TBD
Cork Harbour
TBD
TBD
Cost of Living
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 5
Provide for access to other markets, nationally and internationally
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Reputation and Brand
TBD
TBD
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Cork Airport
TBD
TBD
Cork Harbour
TBD
TBD
Tourism
TBD
TBD
Exports
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal – Research and 
Innovation
Research and Innovation
High Level Goal 1
Drive growth through research and innovation, across social and 
economic sectors and throughout the county
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Clustering
TBD
TBD

198
Education
TBD
TBD
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2
Provide for the capturing, protecting and commercialising of ideas 
and know-how, large and small in scale
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 3
Provide for the building of a world class research network within Cork, 
linking existing and proposed institutes, physically and operationally
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
Clustering
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural cork
TBD
TBD
Data Co-Ordination
TBD
TBD
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal – Climate Change 
/ Energy
Climate Change / Energy
High Level Goal 1
Provide for the alignment of County Cork with the national targets for 
emission reductions
LECP Objectives (Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
TBD
TBD

199
Local Economic And Community Plan
Physical Infrastructure
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2
Provide for potential climate change impacts within County Cork, 
including adaption
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
TBD
TBD
Physical Infrastructure
High Level Goal 3
Ensure that our activities and places, existing and proposed, are 
robust in terms of energy choice
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Housing
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Physical Infrastructure
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 4
Provide for the harnessing of County Cork’s energy potential, including 
the protection of Cork’s locational and other energy assets
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 5
Provide for the creation of a local circular economy model of 
sustainability
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
TBD
TBD
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD

200
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal – Education
Education
High Level Goal 1
Provide for education and training opportunities that facilitate 
all learners in accessing the knowledge and skills they need to 
participate fully in society and the economy
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
Family and Home Life
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2
Provide for the alignment of education and training opportunities with 
the social and economic needs and potential of the county
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Education
TBD
TBD
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 3
Provide for opportunities for citizens to access information that will 
contribute to positive life choices
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Education
TBD
TBD
Data Co-Ordination
TBD
TBD
Community
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal – Poverty / Social 
Exclusion

201
Local Economic And Community Plan
Poverty / Social Inclusion
High Level Goal 1
Provide for the removal of barriers that contribute to physical, social 
and economic exclusion, for all life stages
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Institutional 
Relationships
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Research, Development 
and Innovation
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Cost of Living
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Security
TBD
TBD
Multi-Culturalism
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2
Facilitate citizen engagement with social and economic opportunities
LECP Objectives (Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Community
TBD
TBD
Cost of Living
TBD
TBD
Data Co-Ordination
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD

202
High Level Goal 3
Provide for the recognition that all citizens are valued equally and 
have the potential to contribute to County Cork society in a positive 
manner
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Values
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Community
TBD
TBD
Housing
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Family and Home Life
TBD
TBD
Multi-Culturalism
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 4
Facilitate the enhancement of community identity, solidarity and civic 
engagement
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Values
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Community
TBD
TBD
Human Capital
TBD
TBD
Family and Home Life
TBD
TBD
Data Co-Ordination
TBD
TBD
Multi-Culturalism
TBD
TBD
Security
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 5
Provide for access by all citizens to services that enhance their quality 
of life
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders

203
Local Economic And Community Plan
Values
TBD
TBD
Education
TBD
TBD
Social Inclusion
TBD
TBD
Community
TBD
TBD
Health
TBD
TBD
Employment / Income
TBD
TBD
Housing
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Cost of Living
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Family and Home Life
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Security
TBD
TBD
EU 2020 / National Reform Programme Theme & LECP High Level Goal – Receiving Envi­
ronment
Receiving Environment
High Level Goal 1
Optimise the sustainable environmental receiving capacity of the 
County in order to facilitate planned for growth and change
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Energy
TBD
TBD
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
TBD
TBD
Physical Infrastructure
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Cork Harbour
TBD
TBD
High Level Goal 2
Provide for the physical enhancement of Cork County’s rural and 
urban places
LECP Objectives 
(Assets)
Lead Agency
Supporting Stakeholders
Urban Cork
TBD
TBD

204
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Rural Cork
TBD
TBD
Connectivity
TBD
TBD
Physical Infrastructure
TBD
TBD
Regulatory Environment
TBD
TBD
Cork Harbour
TBD
TBD
Social Activities
TBD
TBD
Arts, Heritage and 
Culture
TBD
TBD
Note: Table to be updated with regard to Lead Agencies and Supporting Stakeholders 
during initial implementation phase. 

205
Local Economic And Community Plan
APPENDIX 2 
ALIGNMENT WITH SOUTH WEST REGIONAL 
PLANNING GUIDELINES 2010 - 2022
Alignment with South West Regional Planning Guidelines 2010 - 2022
Policy / 
Recommendation
RPG Indicator Action
LECP 
Aligned
Relevant LECP Objective / 
Assets
RV-01(realising economic 
potential, high quality of 
life etc)
Overall
All Objectives  / Assets
RES-01 (growth of 
companies across 
economic sectors,
ensuring adequate 
suitable locations etc)
National /International 
benchmarking of land, 
labour, transport costs etc. 
GVA, GDP, GNP. Numbers 
of new jobs created, new 
company start ups, use 
of renewables, access to 
sustainable methods of 
transport.
Human Capital
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Employment / Income
Connectivity
Energy
Education
RES-02 (Growth in market
services/ retail)
National /International
benchmarking of land, labour, 
transport costs etc. numbers 
of new jobs created, new 
company start ups, especially 
within Gateway and hubs as
well as sustainability in terms
of access and energy issues.
Human Capital
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Employment / Income
Connectivity
Energy
Education
RES-03 (Tourism)
Facilitation through CDPs/
LAPs, Tourism Plan for the 
SW.
Tourism
Employment
Rural Cork
Connectivity
RES-04 (primary resource
based sectors)
Numbers employed in 
forestry agriculture fishing, 
aquaculture etc. Levels of 
new forestry plantations.
Employment
Rural Cork
Connectivity

206
RES-05 (Rural
Diversification)
Broadband penetration,
Business start up data from
enterprise boards etc.
Employment / Income
Connectivity
RES-06 (Strategic
Locations)
Levels of strategic land
reserves, implementation of
strategic infrastructure,
Numbers of FDI and large 
scale industries.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Physical Infrastructure
Clustering
RSS-01 (Zoned Land Study)
Zoning provision in each local 
authority area in accordance 
with table 4.5. Provision of 
infrastructure.
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RSS-02 (Cork Gateway –
key driver)
Levels of infrastructure
provision, roll out of new
transportation services, 
modal shift targets 
regeneration of Docklands 
and other older areas/ 
brownfield sites, reduction in 
numbers of one offs
outside of the urban areas.
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RSS-03 (Mallow Hub)
Levels of infrastructure
provision, roll out of new
transportation services, 
modal shift targets 
regeneration of older areas/ 
brownfield sites, reduction in 
numbers of one offs
outside of the urban areas.
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change 

207
Local Economic And Community Plan
RSS-04 (Tralee-Killarney
Linked Hub)
Levels of infrastructure
provision, roll out of new
transportation services, 
modal shift targets 
regeneration of older areas/ 
brownfield sites, reduction in 
numbers of one offs
outside of the urban areas
N/A
RSS-05 (Ring Towns)
Increase in local services and 
employment levels, reduction 
in commuting, modal shift 
targets, reduction in numbers 
of new housing outside of the 
urban areas.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
	
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RSS-06 (Northern Area)
Levels of employment, 
startups, population levels, 
provision of services and 
infrastructure.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
	
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change 
RSS-07 (Western Area)
Levels of employment, 
startups, population levels, 
provision of services and 
infrastructure.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
	
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change 

208
RTS-01 (Modal Split,
integrated transport
strategies)
Census travel to work data,
delivery of T21 programme,
modal split, climate change
indicators POWCAR
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
	
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RTS-02 (Public transport
actions)
Census travel to work data,
delivery of T21 programme,
modal split, climate change
indicators POWCAR
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
	
Housing
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RTS-03 (cycling, walking)
Levels of construction of new
cycleways and walkways,
retrofitting of new facilities,
census travel to work data,
delivery of T21 programme,
modal split, climate change
indicators, POWCAR
Connectivity
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change 
RTS-04 (Road
infrastructure)
Delivery of T21infrastructure,
completion of regionally
important projects, detailed
environmental assessments
where appropriate. POWCAR
Connectivity
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RTS-05 (Airports)
Provision of new facilities,
passenger/cargo numbers.
Connectivity
Cork Airport
RTS-06 (Ports, Harbours)
Passenger /cargo numbers,
improvement of N28, 
relocation of Port of Cork and 
Seveso sites, construction of 
port at
Ballylongford.
Connectivity
Cork Harbour

209
Local Economic And Community Plan
RTS-07 (Water, waste
water)
Implementation of WSIPs
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
RTS-08 (Waste
management)
Implementation of waste
management plans, provision 
of MRFs.
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change 
RTS-09 (Energy)
Enhancement of grid capacity, 
provision of additional 
renewable resources. Energy
consumption/capita
Energy
RI-03 (Telecommunications)
Broadband penetration.
Rural Cork
Connectivity
REAS-01 (Landscape
Character)
Designation of landscape 
areas of high value
Rural Cork
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
Tourism
Arts, Culture and Heritage
REAS-02 (Regional
Coastline)
Development of integrated
coastal management 
strategies.
Rural Cork
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
Tourism
Arts, Culture and Heritage 
REAS-03 (Natural Heritage)
Implementation/inclusion of
biodiversity objectives 
in CDPs, carrying out of 
screening for H.D.A.
Rural Cork
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
Tourism
Arts, Culture and Heritage 
REAS-04 (Environmental
Quality)
Additional soil, air and water
quality monitoring systems.
Achievement of WFD targets.
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
REAS-05 (Flood Risk)
Completion of CFRAM studies.
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change

210
REAS-06 (Built heritage,
archaeology)
Identification of areas of 
special character, inclusion 
of building in the RPS. 
Implementation of design 
statements.
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Arts, Culture and Heritage
REAS-07
(Social/Community
Infrastructure)
Protection and provision of
community infrastructures 
and services in towns and 
villages.
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Community	
	
Physical 
Infrastructure	
Social Activities	
Arts, Culture and Heritage
REAS-08 (Cultural Heritage)
LAPs for the Gaeltacht areas
Rural Cork
Community	
	
Tourism	
Social Inclusion	
Social Activities	
Arts, Culture and Heritage
REAS-09 (Island
communities)
Broadband penetration, 
provision of infrastructure/
facilities.
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community	
	
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
Tourism
Social Inclusion
Multiculturalism	
	
Arts, Culture and Heritage
REAS-10 (Social inclusion
and regeneration)
Provision of infrastructure 
and facilities. Quality of life 
reports from CSO.
Human Capital
Community
Physical Infrastructure
Natural Environment and 
Climate Change
Family and Home Life	
Social Inclusion	
Social Activities	
Values
Note: Table to be updated as action programmes are developed and on adoption of the 
future RSES

211
Local Economic And Community Plan
APPENDIX 3
ALIGNMENT WITH CORK COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
CORE STRATEGY 2014
Alignment with Cork County Development Plan Core Strategy 2014
County Development Plan Core Strategy 
Objective
LECP Aligned
Relevant LECP Objectives / 
Assets
CS 3-1: Network of Settlements: Higher 
Order Settlements gateway Hubs and 
Main settlements
The LECP recognises the value to the 
region of the settlement hierarchy 
established in the current Cork County 
Development Plan and advocates for 
the strengthening of this hierarchy by 
advocating for the growth of the Cork 
region population through settlement 
focussed, transport orientated 
development. 
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Housing
CS 3-2: Network of Settlements: Lower 
Order Settlements
The LECP recognises the socio-economic 
value of the Lower Order Settlements 
network and advocates for a range of 
social and economic actions to support 
these smaller communities.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community
Housing

212
CS 4-3: North Cork Strategic Planning 
Area
The LECP recognises the important 
regional role that the North Cork 
settlement network will play in 
supporting employment and housing 
growth within the region. It further 
supports the economic diversification 
and provision of increased connectivity 
(physical and communications) of North 
Cork, as set out in the Core Strategy.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community
Housing
CS 4-1: County Metropolitan Cork 
Strategic Planning Area
The LECP recognises Metropolitan Cork 
as a key regional driver of growth, 
providing a socio-economic focus for 
the Cork region. In accordance with 
this Core Strategy Objective, the LECP 
supports the strategic management of 
Cork Harbour, Cork International Airport, 
as well as other key strategic socio-
economic asserts within Metropolitan 
Cork, such as, housing, employment, 
transportation, etc. 
Human Capital Employment / 
Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community
Housing
Cork Harbour
Cork Airport
CS 4-2: Greater Cork Ring Strategic 
Planning Area
The LECP recognises the important role 
that Cork Ring plays within the Cork 
region, having both significant socio-
economic linkages with Metropolitan 
Cork and fulfilling significant rural 
functions also. Furthermore, and in 
alignment with the Core Strategy, the 
LECP envisages an important future role 
for Cork Ring – particularly the network 
of county towns – in facilitating future 
regional population growth, linked to a 
regional transport strategy. 
Human Capital Employment / 
Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community
Housing

213
Local Economic And Community Plan
CS 4-4: West Cork Strategic Planning Area
The LECP recognises the important 
regional role that the West Cork 
settlement network will play in 
supporting employment and housing 
growth within the region. It further 
supports the economic diversification 
and provision of increased connectivity 
(physical and communications) of West 
Cork, as set out in the Core Strategy.
Employment / Income
Urban Cork
Rural Cork
Connectivity
Community
Housing
CS 5-1: Climate Change Adaptation
The LECP recognises the importance of 
climate change adaption and supports 
the drafting of a climate change adaption 
strategy for the Cork region, in order 
to future-proof our communities and 
regional economy. 
Natural Environment & Climate 
Change Adaption
Energy
Note: Table to be updated as action programmes are developed and expanded to 
include reference to Municipal District Plans currently under review. 

214
 Local Economic And Community Plan
APPENDIX 4
CASE STUDY - OVERVIEW OF TOURISM
Overview
Cork County Council and Cork City Council, in conjunction with Fáilte Ireland, established a high 
level Tourism Strategy Group to develop a vision and action plan to give cohesive direction to the 
future growth of Cork tourism. This group was charged with delivering a realisable but challenging 
strategy to maximise the economic return from tourism to Cork.
Process Overview & Output
 
	
	
01
01
Recognise Importance 
of Tourism within Cork 
02
02
Establish Multi-Agency
 Tourism Taskforce
03
03
Develop Tourism 
Strategy & Actions
05
05
Co-ordinate and 
Implement Actions 
& Monitor Progress
04
04
Establish Implement-
ation Body 

215
Local Economic And Community Plan
Process Overview & Output 
The Growing Tourism in Cork – A Collective Strategy states, ‘Collaboration amongst the key stake­
holders is crucial. We must develop a single-minded focus which will help to ensure the brand is 
developed in a seamless and measurable way to the visitor. To realise this, a well-coordinated exe­
cution of the agreed actions and a supporting structure to lead this with the many stakeholders will 
be essential. The efforts of the Cork strategic tourism group and local authorities in fostering this 
collaboration and partnership is invaluable.’
Local Economic and Community Plan Process
The tourism sector is just one example of how regional inter-agency collaboration within Cork 
has benefitted the development of a key regional asset. This LECP seeks to promote a similar 
collaborative approach to the protection and enhancement of all our key regional assets.

216
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Quality of Life within the  
Cork County Council Area.
A Presentation Prepared For:
October 2015 
TD
S15-0138
Profile
APPENDIX 5 - QUALITY OF LIFE SURVEY OUTCOMES

217
Local Economic And Community Plan
2 
Cork County Council sought to explore the perceptions of Cork County 
Council area residents in relation to aspects of both the local area and 
their quality of life.
Amárach Research conducted the fieldwork between August and 
September 2015 using face to face surveys in respondents’ own homes.
Quotas were set to ensure the sample represented the local population, 
this included respondents in each of the eight districts including the 
gaeltacht region and members of the travelling community.
The total sample was weighted using census data for age, gender, 
social class and district to ensure that the total sample was 
representative of the Cork County Council area.
Some questions that were deemed sensitive were completed using 
“self-complete” whereby the interviewer handed the tablet to the 
respondent to answer a series of questions. These are identified at the 
bottom of each slide by “SELF COMPLETE”.
Background
4 
A minimum of three sampling points (30 surveys) per district were 
allocated. The surveys within the travelling community were conducted 
in Kanturk/ Mallow but were excluded from the overall Kanturk/ Mallow 
district results.
The surveys were weighted back using census data to ensure that the 
“total” Cork County figures were representative of the districts.
Throughout the report the key results for each district are outlined. 
However, please note that these are relatively small in size (c. 50 
respondents) and have not been weighted within each district for age/ 
gender etc.
Sample Size per District 
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
Ballin-
collig 
Cobh 
Blarney/ 
Macroom
Bandon/
Kinsale 
East 
Cork 
Fermoy 
Kanturk/ 
Mallow 
West 
Cork
Travelling 
Community
Count 
112 
100
40
41
51
98
38
40
10
Weighted
95
69
58
58
58
58
62
69
1 

218
 Local Economic And Community Plan
5 
Profile of Sample – I 
50
13
82
50
41
11
31
3
15
2
% 
Gender 
% 
Age 
% 
Place of 
birth 
Male 
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Female 
16-24
25-44
45-64
65-98
Cork 
Elsewhere in ROI 
UK
Other Europe 
Other 
11
33
8
10
15
9
*5
7
2
Self-employed 
% 
Employment 
Status 
Work part time 
Student 
Housewife 
Retired 
Full time carer 
Unemployed
Work full time 
Farmer
Refused
* 
Quotas were set for age, gender, social class and district. 
26
12
9
29
11
21
25
76
20
17
2
10
32
*
4
28
*
3
17
5
10
7
3
7
1
* 8
3
Higher managerial/ 
professional 
Intermedial managerial 
professional 
Supervisor/ clerical 
Skilled minimal worker 
Semi or unskilled manual work 
Student 
Housewife/ homemaker
Retired
Full-time carer
Farmer 50- acres
Profile of Sample – II
% 
% 
% 
0-12 Years 
Age of those 
in home 
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Profile 
of home 
Chief 
income 
earner 
13-17 years 
18-24 years 
25-34 years 
35-44 years 
45-54 years 
55-64 years 
65-74 years 
75 years+ 
Single occupier 
Couple co-habiting 
Family 
Sharing 
Other 
Casual worker 
Unemployed
Farmer 50+ acres

219
Local Economic And Community Plan
7 
Profile of Sample – III
9
13
1
5
17
98
46
26
1
41
14
29
% 
% 
% 
Rented privately 
Home 
ownership
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Location 
Type of 
Home 
Rented through 
social housing
Paying mortgage
Own outright
In a village
In a town
Near a village
Near a town
Countryside (or 
not within 5 mins 
drive of a town or 
village)
Apartment or flat
House
Other
Results

220
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Section 1: 
Perception of Cork 
County
10
Agreement with Statement:  
“My Local Area is a Great Place to Live”
1
2
59
33
Neither/
nor (3) 
Mean 
/5.0
5
4.2
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.5
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2
3.4
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Cork County Council residents overwhelmingly agree (92%) that their local area is a 
great place to live.  This was particularly high (4.5/5.0) in the Bandon/ Kinsale district.
Q.2. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree how much do you agree with the following statement?
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 
% 

221
Local Economic And Community Plan
11
4
1
34
11
Area Compared to Five Years ago 
The
Same
(3)
Don’t 
know
Mean 
/5.0
45
5
3.5
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.5
3.3
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Residents perceive that their local area is better (45%) or much 
the same as a place to live (45%) compared to five years ago.
Q.4 Overall, compared  to five years ago do you think the area you live in is ….
Much 
worse 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Much 
better 
(5) 
% 
12
Satisfaction with Aspects of the Area (i) 
1
2
3
3
4
3
7
10
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
4
3
47
47
51
47
61
49
54
47
46
39
34
29
33
17
27
17
23
23
The people who live in the area
Population size
Attractiveness of local environment
Sense of community
Design of the area
Level of graffiti
Level of litter and rubbish
Availability of parks/open spaces
Quality of parks and open spaces
Neither
/nor (3) 
Don’t 
know
Mean 
4 
9 
4.4 
5 
11
4.3 
7 
10
4.1 
5 
10
4.2 
6 
11
4.0 
8 
12
4.1 
9 
10
3.8 
6 
10
3.8 
7 
11
3.9 
Q.3. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Extremely Dissatisfied and 5 is Extremely Satisfied how satisfied are you with the following aspects of 
your local area?  
Satisfaction with the area is very high across a wide range of aspects. 
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
% 
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 

222
 Local Economic And Community Plan
13
Satisfaction with Aspects of the Area (ii) 
11
8
12
9
10
12
13
9
7
2
5
3
7
5
7
3
48
53
52
45
47
52
45
49
21
14
14
20
17
10
17
10
Services available
Planning and zoning
Maintenance of the area
Level of crime
Leisure activities available
Road networks
Facilities available
Presence of heritage sites and 
other important buildings
Neither
/nor (3) 
Don’t 
know
Mean 
5 
10
3.7 
10
13
3.8 
5 
10
3.7 
12
10
3.8 
8 
10
3.6 
11
10
3.6 
6 
11
3.6 
14
15
3.6 
While satisfaction remains high, the aspects residents are less satisfied 
with include facilities, overall maintenance and road networks.
Q.3. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Extremely Dissatisfied and 5 is Extremely Satisfied how satisfied are you with the following aspects of 
your local area?  
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 
% 
14
Satisfaction with Aspects of the Area 
(mean scores per district)
Mean scores out of 5.0 
Total 
B
C
B.M 
B.K 
E.C 
F
K.M 
W.C 
T.C 
The people who live in the 
area
4.4 
4.4 
4.2 
4.4 
4.5 
4.3 
4.2 
4.2 
4.5 
4.0 
Population size
4.3 
4.2 
4.0 
4.2 
4.7 
4.2 
4.2 
3.8 
4.5 
4.0 
Sense of community
4.2 
4.1 
4.0 
4.2 
4.5 
4.1 
4.1 
4.1 
4.5 
4.0 
Level of graffiti 
4.1 
4.0
3.7 
4.1 
4.6 
4.2 
4.0 
4.1 
4.4 
4.0 
Attractiveness of local 
environment
4.1 
4.2 
3.9 
3.8 
4.7 
4.2 
4.0 
4.2 
4.0 
4.0 
Design of the area
4 
3.8 
3.8 
4.1 
4.4 
3.7 
3.9 
4.0 
4.1 
3.7 
Quality of parks and open 
spaces 
3.9 
4.2 
3.9 
4.1 
4.0 
3.6 
3.7 
3.9 
3.3 
3.9 
Planning and zoning 
3.8 
3.6 
3.6 
4.0 
4.3 
3.5 
3.7 
3.6 
3.9 
4.0 
Level of litter and rubbish
3.8 
3.8 
3.5 
3.8 
3.9 
4.0 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
4.0 
Availability of parks and 
open spaces
3.8 
4.2 
4.0 
4.1 
4.0 
3.5 
3.6 
3.9 
3.3 
4.0 
Level of crime
3.8 
3.8 
3.4 
3.1 
4.2 
4.0 
3.6 
3.9 
4.1 
3.7 
Maintenance of the area
3.7 
4.0 
3.7 
4.0 
3.1 
3.8 
3.8 
4.2 
2.8 
4.0 
Services available
3.7 
4.0 
3.9 
4.2 
3.5 
3.7 
3.7 
3.4 
3.2 
4.0 
Presence of heritage sites 
and other important 
buildings 
3.6 
3.2 
3.9 
4.0 
3.6 
3.7 
3.7 
3.9 
3.5 
3.5 
Road networks
3.6 
3.5 
3.6 
4.0 
3.1 
3.5 
3.8 
3.4 
3.4 
4.0 
Leisure activities available
3.6 
4.2 
3.7 
4.3 
3.3 
3.5 
3.5 
3.6 
3.0 
4.0 
Facilities available
3.6 
4.1 
3.8 
4.4 
3.1 
3.4 
3.5 
3.7 
2.9 
4.0 

223
Local Economic And Community Plan
15
Pride in Area and Cultural Aspects 
2
11
16
1
2
7
53
47
41
33
30
10
Strongly disagree 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Strongly agree 
(5) 
Q.5. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree how much do you agree with the following statements
In line with the findings that the area is a great place to live the majority of residents (86%) 
feel a sense of pride in their area. More than 3 in 4 residents (77%) have noticed an 
increasing number of people with different lifestyles and cultures in the area. Just over half 
(51%) agree that there is a culturally rich and diverse arts scene in his or her area.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Neither
/nor (3) 
Don’t 
know
Mean 
9
3
4.2 
9
1
4.0 
18
8
3.3 
I feel a sense of pride in the way my area 
looks and feels 
The area where I live is becoming home 
for an increasing number of people with 
different lifestyles and cultures
The area where I live has a culturally 
rich and diverse arts scene 
% 
16
Pride in Area and Cultural Aspects (mean scores) 
Those in Bandon/ Kinsale and in West Cork indicate stronger agreement that they feel 
a sense of pride in their area. Ballincollig and East Cork are the two areas with the 
lowest (albeit neutral) agreement with having a culturally rich and diverse arts scene.
Q.5. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree how much do you agree with the following statements
Total 
B
C
B.M 
B.K 
E.C 
F
K.M 
W.C 
T.C 
I feel a sense of pride in the 
way my area looks and feels. 
4.2 
4.1 
4.0 
4.2 
4.6 
4.0 
4.0 
4.2 
4.4 
3.6 
The are where I live is 
becoming home for an 
increasing number of people 
with different lifestyles and 
cultures 
4.0 
4.1 
3.9 
4.2 
4.1 
3.8 
3.7 
3.8 
4.0 
3.9 
The are where I live has a 
culturally rich and diverse 
arts scene 
3.3 
3.0 
3.5 
3.6 
3.5 
3.0 
3.2 
3.7 
3.5 
3.2 
(Base of Total: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)

224
 Local Economic And Community Plan
17
Alone  in my area during the day 
Alone  in my home during the day 
Alone in my home at night
Alone in my area at night
Level of Safeness Felt by Residents 
4
3
7
9
1
1
2
2
23
22
29
28
68
68
56
54
Very 
unsafe 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Very 
safe 
(5) 
Cork County residents feel very safe alone in their home 
and their areas both during the day and during the night.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Neither
/nor (3) 
Don’t 
know
Mean 
4 
1 
4.6 
4 
1 
4.5 
6 
1 
4.3 
6 
1 
4.3 
Q.11. Now thinking about issues of crime and safety, in general how safe or unsafe do you feel in the following situations, on a scale of
1-5 where 1 is very unsafe and 5 very safe.
% 
18
Level of Safeness Felt by Residents (mean score) 
While the level of safeness felt was very high, the highest ratings of feeling 
safe were recorded in Bandon/ Kinsale, East Cork and West Cork. Those in 
the Travelling Community recorded the lowest ratings of feeling safe. 
Q.11. Now thinking about issues of crime and safety, in general how safe or unsafe do you feel in the following situations, on a scale of
1-5 where 1 is very unsafe and 5 very safe.
Total 
B
C
B.M 
B.K 
E.C 
F
K.M 
W.C 
T.C
Alone in my area during 
the day 
4.6 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.8 
4.8 
4.5 
4.1 
4.8 
3.9 
Alone in my home during 
the day 
4.5 
4.3 
4.6 
4.6 
4.8 
4.8 
4.5 
4.1 
4.8 
3.7 
Alone in my home at night
4.3 
4.1 
4.4 
4.6 
4.6 
4.6 
4.1 
3.8 
4.5 
3.9 
Alone in my area at night 
4.3 
4.0 
4.4 
4.5 
4.7 
4.5 
4.0 
3.8 
4.4 
3.6 
(Base of Total: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)

225
Local Economic And Community Plan
19
Frequency of Negative Incidents in Area
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.12. How often, if at all, do the following occur in your local area? The wording “problem” would have biased respondents.
29
26
8
12
9
6
15
21
21
5
3
19
12
9
14
6
11
17
22
30
5
5
33
46
64
61
69
64
57
47
40
81
82
6
4
6
4
8
10
5
5
4
5
7
7
6
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
4
2
4
5
3
2
2
2
2
2
1
0
0
2
2
4
1
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
Never 
Once 
a year 
Every few
months
Monthly
Weekly
Most days
Residents report low incidence and low frequency of negative incidents.  
Don’t Know
Dangerous driving including drink driving and speeding 
Alcohol or drug problems 
Noise pollution 
People you feel unsafe around because of their behaviour, 
attitude or appearance  
Air pollution 
Pollution in streams, rivers, lakes and in the sea 
Vandalism - Graffiti  
Vandalism – damage to property 
Car theft, damage to cars or theft from cars 
People begging on the street 
People sleeping on the street 
20
Negative Incidents Reported as Occurring at 
Least Monthly
Total 
B
C
B.M 
B.K 
E.C 
F
K.M 
W.C 
T.C 
Dangerous driving including drink driving 
and speeding 
13
18
12
24
9
12
19
3
9
0
Alcohol or drug problems 
13
15
26
34
5
9
16
0
0
0
Noise pollution 
13
31
17
21
2
12
16
0
0
0
Pollution in streams, rivers, lakes and in the 
sea
9
17
17
12
2
16
3
0
0
0
People you feel unsafe around because of 
their behaviour, attitude or appearance 
8
9
22
10
3
7
7
3
0
0
Air pollution 
8
23
14
12
0
3
3
0
0
0
Vandalism - Graffiti 
6
11
7
13
0
4
3
0
0
0
Vandalism – damage to property 
6
14
9
12
0
3
3
0
0
0
Car theft, damage to cars or theft from cars 
5
12
6
12
3
2
2
0
0
0
People begging on the street 
4
5
6
0
0
16
7
0
0
0
People sleeping on the street 
2
3
4
0
0
8
2
0
0
0
Looking specifically at the proportion of residents stating negative incidents 
occur at least monthly it is evident there is some variation between districts 
with those closest to the city experiencing more of these incidents.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)

226
 Local Economic And Community Plan
Section 2: 
Community in Cork 
County
22
Importance of Feeling a Sense of Community 
Q.7. How much do you agree or disagree with the following statements on a scale of 1-5 where 1 is strongly disagree and 5 is strongly
agree: It’s important to me to feel a sense of community with people in my neighbourhood
Residents of Cork County agree (89%) that it is important 
to feel a sense of community in their neighbourhoods.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.2 
4.1 
4.1 
3.9 
4.4 
4.3 
4.3 
4.3 
4.3 
3.2 
3
-
55
34
(2) 
(4) 
Neither
/nor (3) 
Mean 
8
4.2 
% 
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 

227
Local Economic And Community Plan
23
Agreement with Feeling a Sense of Community 
with Neighbours  
2
1
54
34
(2) 
(4) 
Q.7. How much do you agree or disagree with the following statements on a scale of 1-5 where 1 is strongly disagree and 5 is strongly 
agree: I feel a sense of  community with others in my neighbourhood.
A similar proportion (88%) agree that they do feel a sense of community in their neighbourhoods. 
Of the small proportion (69 people) who did not agree the primary reasons given were due to their 
preference to socialise with family and friends (11 people), preferring to keep to themselves (11 
people) and due to their own busy lives (9 people).
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Neither
/nor (3) 
Mean 
9 
4.2 
% 
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.2 
4.0 
4.1 
4.0 
4.4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
3.8 
24
Types of Interaction with Neighbours
Brief conversation
A nod or saying hello
Support or close friendship 
A visit, or asking each other for small favours
Disapproving looks or avoiding one another
Avoiding eye contact
Outright tension  or disagreement 
93
90
84
81
9
8
7
%
Q.9. In the last 12 months, have you had any of the following types of contact with someone  in your area?
The vast majority of Cork County residents experienced positive interactions 
with their neighbours raging from a simple nod or saying hello (90%) to support 
or close friendship (84%). Less than one in ten reported experiencing tension.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)

228
 Local Economic And Community Plan
25
Social Network and Group Membership
A sports club
A hobby or interest group
A group of people from work or school
A community or voluntary group such as tidy 
towns, lions club etc. 
A church or spiritual group
A group outside of your normal circle of friends 
that you connect with through websites such as 
Facebook / Twitter/ other online communities
None of the above
47
33
30
28
17
16
21
%
Q.10. To which of the following social networks and groups, if any, do you belong?
Almost 4 in 5 (79%) residents indicated that they are members of a social 
group of some description, with sports clubs being the most popular (47%).
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Section 3: 
Transport in Cork 
County

229
Local Economic And Community Plan
27
Frequency of Using Different Modes of Transport
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
1
2
7
5
15
25
13
21
3
6
-
-
1
2
7
8
9
14
2
6
12
10
11
62
46
46
72
60
89
85
-
4
12
12
15
13
3
4
3
1
3
27
49
15
13
8
1
1
2
-
84
57
20
5
4
-
2
1
1
-
Car or van (driven by you)
Walking
Car or van (as a passenger) 
Bicycle 
Public Bus (e.g. Bus Eireann) 
Taxi 
Private Bus (e.g. other bus company) 
Train 
Motorbike/Scooter 
Ferry 
-Never 
-Oncea year 
-Every few 
months
-Monthly
-Weekly
-Most days
Residents primarily drive in Cork County, with low incidence of public transport usage reported.
Q.13. Thinking of the transport available either within or to/ from your local area: within the past year how often, if at all, did you use the 
following forms of transport? 
28
All Residents 
(N = 530)
Those who use public 
transport at least monthly 
(N=177)
Satisfaction with Public Transport 
8
3
6
1
46
59
16
26
Neither
/ nor
(3)
Don’t 
know
Mean 
15
9
3.6
10
1
4.1
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
3.6
4.1
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.7
3.6
3.2
3.4
3.8
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Satisfaction with public transport is good and is highest 
amongst those who use public transport at least monthly. 
Q.14. Based on your experiences or perceptions of public transport in your area how satisfied overall are you on a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 
is Extremely Dissatisfied and 5 is Extremely Satisfied?
Extremely  
dissatisfied 
(1)
(2) 
(4) 
Extremely 
satisfied 
(5) 

230
 Local Economic And Community Plan
29
78
16
1
20
Perception of Public Transport
Public bus 
Train 
Boat or ferry 
None
%
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.15. Thinking about your area specifically: which types of public transport do you think are …
71
15
1
27
%
76
18
1
22
%
73
16
1
25
%
70
18
*
27
%
68
18
1
28
%
Available
The public bus service is the most available and 
most positively perceived form of public transport.
Affordable
Safe On 
board
Easy to 
access
Reliable
Time 
efficient
Section 4: 
Wellbeing of 
Residents

231
Local Economic And Community Plan
31
Most Important Things to Residents
When asked to rank the five most important things in their lives family & home 
life, physical health and personal happiness were deemed the most important.
Q.1. Different things are important to different people in any area. From the following list, what are the five most important items to you?
Family and home life
Physical Health
Personal happiness
Friendship
Employment
Mental health
Suitable accommodation
Money and prices
Education
Personal beliefs
66
10
8
2
2
1
5
1
2
-
91
62
60
48
36
31
30
28
27
17
Main 
% 
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Any 
% 
Social values
Religion
Natural environment
Leisure activities
Equality
Holidays
Justice
Possessions
Other 
-
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
16
13
10
8
8
6
5
3
-
Main 
% 
Any 
% 
32
General Health
45
43
9
2
*
Very good 
% 
General 
Health 
Good 
Fair 
Bad 
Very Bad 
13%
87%
Yes 
No
Any Long Standing 
Illness 
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
The majority of Cork Residents rated their health as good or very good 
(88%) with just over 1 in 10 (13%) stating they had a long standing illness.
Q.18 How is your health in general ? Is it…

232
 Local Economic And Community Plan
33
Mobility of Respondent
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.20a Which statement best describes your mobility?
Just 5% of respondents reported having difficulty in relation to mobility. 
85
10
4
*
1
I have no difficulty walking around 
% 
I have little difficulty walking around 
I have some difficulty walking around
I have severe difficulty walking around
I am unable to walk around
34
Mobility of Others in Household
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.20b Does anyone else in your household have difficulty walking around?
A similar proportion reported limited mobility 
amongst other members of the household.
5
*
85
10
Yes little or some difficulty 
% 
Yes severe difficulty or unable to walk around 
No difficulty 
N/A 

233
Local Economic And Community Plan
35
Number of days in the last 7 days respondent 
was “active”.
9
12
38
41
Mean 
4.0
days
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.0 
days
4.4
4.1
3.7
4.3
4.4
3.6
4.2
3.6
4.3
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
The average number of days that a reposndent 
indicated they were active was 4 days in the past week.
Q21 Thinking about ALL your physical activities (including any physical tasks you might do at work, doing housework or gardening,
travelling from place to place or playing sports), on how many of the  last 7 days were you active? By 'active' we mean either: 15 minutes 
or more of vigorous activity: - which makes you breathe a lot harder than normal (like running or fast swimming) 30 minutes or more of 
moderate    activity: - which makes you breathe just a little harder than normal (like brisk walking, light swimming, carrying light loads). 
None 
1-2
days
3-4 
days
5-7 
days
% 
36
Satisfaction with Life in General 
* 2
52
31
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.2
4.3
4.2
3.9
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
3.6
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Satisfaction with life in general is very high amongst Cork County residents 
with over 4 in 5 (83%) stating they are either satisfied or very satisfied.
Q.22a Taking everything into account, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with your life in general these days? SELF COMPLETE.
Very  
dissatisfied 
 (1)(2) 
(4) 
Very 
satisfied 
(5) 
Neither/ 
Nor
(3)
Prefer 
not to 
answer
Mean 
5
10
4.2
% 

234
 Local Economic And Community Plan
37
Happiness in General 
1
2
49
31
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
4.2
4.3
4.1
3.8
4.6
4.1
4.0
4.1
4.3
3.8
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Similarly overall happiness these days is high amongst Cork 
County residents with 4 in 5 (80%) stating they are happy or very 
happy. This is highest amongst Blarney Kinsale residents.
Q.22b In general how happy or unhappy would you say you are these days? SELF COMPLETE.
Very 
unhappy 
 (1)(2)
(4) 
Very 
happy 
(5) 
Neither
/ Nor
(3)
Prefer 
not to 
answer
Mean 
7
9
4.2
% 
38
Rating of Quality of Life 
* 2
56
27
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
3.9
3.9
3.8
3.7
4.0
3.8
3.8
3.9
4.0
3.4
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Cork County residents consider their quality 
of life to be good (56%) or very good (27%).
Q.23 Would you say that your overall quality of life is …. SELF COMPLETE.
Extremely 
poor
 (1)(2) 
(4) 
Extremely 
good
(5)
Neither/
nor (3)
I’d 
Prefer
not to 
answer
Mean 
7
8
3.9
% 

235
Local Economic And Community Plan
39
Main Reasons for Poor Rating 
(Base: All with poor quality of life - 13)
Rating of Quality of Life – Rationale 
The primary rationale for good quality of life was cited as being “personal reasons” (57%), which 
is in line with the aspects of live deemed to be the most important to Cork County residents.
Q24 What is the main reason for giving your quality of life this rating? SELF COMPLETE. 
%
Health Reasons 
5 mentions 
Financial Reasons 
3 mentions 
Reasons relating to 
area you live 
3 mentions 
Professional Reasons 
1 mention 
I’d prefer not to answer 1 mention 
Personal Reasons 
0 mentions 
Other 
0 mentions 
Main Reasons for Good Rating 
(Base: All with good quality of life - 437)
57
16
11
3
5
3
4
Personal Reasons 
Health Reasons 
Professional Reasons 
Financial Reasons 
Reasons relating to 
area you live 
Other 
I’d prefer not to 
answer 
40
Change in Quality of Life 
8
1
24
4
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
3.3
3.4
3.3
3.0
3.1
3.3
3.2
3.4
3.3
3.0
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
While over 1 in 4 residents (28%) indicated their quality of life had increased in the past 
12 months the majority of Cork County residents (55%) feel it has remained the same.
Q.25 And compared to 12 months ago, would you say your quality of life has … SELF COMPLETE.
Decreased 
significantly 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Increased 
significantly 
(5) 
Stayed 
the
same
I’d prefer 
not to 
answer
Mean 
55
9
3.3
% 

236
 Local Economic And Community Plan
41
Main Reasons  for Decreased Quality of Life 
(Base: All with quality of life that has decreased- 45)
Change in Quality of Life - Rationale 
Of those who indicated their quality of life had decreased the primary reason 
cited was “health reasons” (17 mentions).  “Personal reasons” was once 
again cited as the primary reason for any improvements in quality of life.
Q.23 Would you say that your overall quality of life is …. SELF COMPLETE.
%
Health reasons 
17 mentions 
Financial reasons 
7 mentions 
Personal reasons 
5 mentions 
Professional reasons 
4 mentions 
Reasons related to the area 
where you live 
4 mentions 
Other 
4 mentions 
I'd prefer not to answer 
4 mentions 
Main Reasons for Increased Quality of Life 
(Base: All with quality of life that has increased- 148)
37
20
15
7
5
11
6
Personal Reasons 
Professional Reasons 
Financial Reasons 
Health Reasons 
Reasons related to the area 
where you live 
Other 
I’d prefer not to answer
42
Satisfaction with Work Life Balance 
5
2
69
17
Neither
/nor
(3)
Mean 
8
3.9
Total
B
C
B.M
B.K
E.C
F
K.M
W.C
T.C
3.9
3.8
3.8
3.8
4.0
3.7
3.9
4.1
4.2
3.0
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents who are employed – 276)
Of Cork County residents who are employed the 
majority are satisfied (86%) with their work life balance.
Q.17 Overall how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the balance between your work and other aspects of your life such as time with
your family or leisure on a scale of 1-5 where 1 is very dissatisfied and 5 is very satisfied?
Very 
dissatisfied 
 (1)
(2) 
(4) 
Very 
satisfied 
(5) 

237
Local Economic And Community Plan
43
Feeling of Loneliness/ Isolation
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.27. Over the past 12 months how often, if ever, have you felt lonely or isolated? SELF COMPLETE.
Q.28. If you were faced with a serious illness or injury, or needed emotional support during a difficult time, is there a friend or family 
member you could turn to for help? SELF COMPLETE.
The majority of Cork County Residents indicated they had access to personal support.
41
35
13
2
* 9
Never 
% 
Rarely 
Sometimes 
Most of the time 
Always 
I’d prefer not to answer
84%
3%
10%
3%
Yes 
Don’t know
Incidence of Feeling Lonely or 
Isolated in past 12 months 
Prefer not to 
answer 
No
Availabilty 
 of Support 
44
Experiences of Stress Over Last 12 Months
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Almost one in five residents (17%) indicate feeling stressed at least monthly over the 
past year. A further quarter (24%) indicate feeling stressed at least every few months.
Q.30 Which statement below best applies to how often, if ever, over the past 12 months you have experienced stress that has had a 
negative effect on you? SELF COMPLETE.
4
7
6
24
15
31
14
Most days 
% 
Weekly 
Monthly 
Every few months 
Once a year 
Never 
I’d prefer not to answer

238
 Local Economic And Community Plan
45
Suitability of Area and Housing 
2
2
7
*
1
6
58
58
61
35
33
13
Strongly 
disagree 
(1) (2) 
(4) 
Strongly 
agree 
(5) 
Q.6 On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree how much do you agree with the following statements with 
these statements about the home in which you currently live?
Residents in Cork feel that their homes and areas suit the needs of their household. The 
majority (74%) feel their housing costs are affordable while just over 1 in 8 disagree.
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Neither
/nor (3) 
Don’t 
know
Mean 
3 
1 
4.3 
5 
1 
4.2 
9 
4 
3.7 
% 
My home suits my needs and the 
needs of others in my household.
The area I live in suits my needs and 
the needs of others in my household.
My housing costs (e.g. rent or 
mortgage, rates, insurance etc.) are 
affordable .
46
Suitability of Area and Housing (mean scores) 
Those living in Blarney Macroom district are least inclined 
to indicate their housing costs are affordable.
Q.6. On a scale of 1-5 where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree how much do you agree with the following statements with 
these statements about the home in which you currently live?
Total 
B
C
B.M B.K 
E.C 
F
K.M W.C T.C 
My home suits my needs and the 
needs of others in my household. 
4.3
4.4
4.0
3.9
4.7
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
3.8
The area I live in suits my needs 
and the needs of others in my 
household. 
4.2
4.3
4.0
4.0
4.7
4.1
4.3
4.2
4.4
3.9
My housing costs (e.g. rent or 
mortgage, rates, insurance etc.) 
are affordable .   
3.7
3.8
3.4
2.6
4.1
3.8
3.7
4.0
4.2
3.4
(Base of Total: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)

239
Local Economic And Community Plan
47
Ability of Household Income to meet Household’s 
Basic Costs
(Base: All Cork Co. Council Residents – 530)
Q.31 Which of the following best describes how well your total household income meets your household’s basic costs (accommodation,
food, basic clothing and other necessities)? SELF COMPLETE.
More than half of Cork County Residents (53%) indicate that they 
have enough money to meet their household’s basic costs.
7
46
25
42
16
% 
I’d prefer not to answer
Not enough money to cover basic costs 
Almost enough money to cover basic costs 
Just enough money to cover basic costs 
Enough money, and a bit to spare 
Enough money, with a good bit to spare 
Conclusions

240
 Local Economic And Community Plan
49
Satisfaction with the local area is very high amongst residents in 
the Cork County Council area with over 9 in 10 agreeing that their 
local area is a great place to live (92%), and satisfaction across a 
range of aspects averaging at over 70%. 
– Residents are particularly satisfied with the people living in
their area (86% satisfied), population size (81%), attractiveness
of the local environment (80%) and sense of community (80%).
– While levels of dissatisfaction are low these tend to relate to
aspects that are in control of Cork County Council (services,
facilities, maintenance of the area and road networks).
– Satisfaction levels are relatively consistent across districts.
West Cork is the one district that has lower level of satisfaction
across a number of features (availability of parks and open
spaces, maintenance of the area and services/ facilities/ leisure
services available). Blarney/ Macroom is less satisfied with the
level of crime than other areas.
50
These high levels of satisfaction are reinforced in other 
responses where residents indicate they feel a sense of 
community (88%) with positive interactions with neighbours. 
Residents also feel safe and report low frequency of negative 
incidents. While infrequent, the frequency of negative incidents 
are higher amongst districts closest the city (Ballincollig, Cobh 
and Blarney/ Macroom).
Public transport is used infrequently in Cork County with just 
one in three (33%) using any form of public transport at least 
once a month. However, 3 in 5 (62%) of residents are satisfied 
and of those who use it monthly the vast majority (85%) are 
satisfied.

241
Local Economic And Community Plan
51
In relation to overall wellbeing of residents in Cork County few 
reported issues with mobility or general health.
Satisfaction with life in general is very high amongst Cork 
County residents with over 4 in 5 (83%) stating they are either 
satisfied or very satisfied. Similarly overall happiness these days 
is high amongst Cork County residents with 4 in 5 (80%) stating 
they are happy or very happy. This is highest amongst Blarney 
Kinsale residents.
It is evident from the research that residents of the Cork County 
Council area are satisfied with the area they live in and with their 
quality of life overall. The features that are considered most 
important (family and physical health) are the primary 
contributors to satisfaction with quality of life.

242
APPENDIX 6 - PROOFING OF THE LECP
In addition to ensuring consistency between the LECP, the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies/ 
Regional Planning Guidelines RSES/RPG and the Core Strategy of the Cork County Development Plan 
2014, six horizontal priorities were used to proof the LECP. The purpose of this process was to 
mitigate the potential for any negative impacts to emerge from the implementation of the plan.
Proofing Process 
The Strategic Environmental Assessment, Screening and Appropriate Assessment process is designed 
to determine whether or not significant effects on the environment would be likely to arise from 
the implementation of the LECP. This process particularly focuses on the environmental component 
of the actions and is, therefore, highly appropriate to the economic dimensions of the actions where 
these have a physical impact on the locality. The LECP has been proofed against six horizontal 
priorities.
Horizontal Priorities for Proofing the LECP
1. Sustainability;
4. Rurality;
2. Equality;
5. Age;
3. Poverty;
6. Disability and Accessibility;
The proofing process adopted for the development of the Cork DRAFT LECP was a multistage process 
that was in general alignment with that suggested in the Guidelines on Local Economic and Com­
munity Plans 2015.
The 2015 Guidelines on Local Economic and Community acknowledge that proofing any LECP can be 
an extremely difficult and time-consuming process, and that the extent of proofing required for the 
community elements of the LECP could be significant given the range of issues it is intended to 
address. Similarly, LCDCs must ensure that the community elements of the LECP meet the proofing 
obligations set out in national policy in relation to other policy areas. 
In the case of Cork County, the proofing of the Plan is an iterative process which is being undertak­
en throughout the Plan evolution from consultation stage to Implementation stage. The themes 
Sustainability, Equality, Poverty, Rurality, Age and Disability & Accessibility have been included 
throughout the plan as areas for consideration in the DRAFT LECP for both the public consultation 
process and by the Advisory Steering Group.
The proofing process was used to inform the consultation procedure to ensure that the range of 
issues being identified were ultimately appropriate for inclusion in the plan. Similarly, the process 
was used in the policy review to ensure that the community elements of the LECP were in conform­
ity with the proofing obligations set out in national policy.

243
Local Economic And Community Plan
Screening Process 
This part of the proofing process was used to identify those elements of the LECP that would have 
a significant impact on the various priority areas. The screening process was implemented at three 
stages during the plan preparation, firstly at the initial Consultation Stage, secondly at the stage of 
preparing the Socio-Economic Statement/Public Consultation Document Finally a more comprehen­
sive screening process was implemented during the Objectives and Actions Stage where actions, 
outcomes and impacts were being developed. 
Scoping Process 
Using the likely action profile emerging from the Screening Process, the LECP framework was inter­
rogated to identify the relevant issues arising. This process used a number of key indicators asso­
ciated with each objective as they were developed, and was designed to confirm the likely bearing 
on each of the six horizontal priorities.
Assessment Process 
Having estimated the extent to which the action profile related to the six horizontal priorities, the 
Assessment Process considered the likely impact in more detail. Given the multitude of variables 
that are involved, the assessment was undertaken to an indicative level, and was used to identify 
the likely direction and scale of any impacts. These were defined as being positive, neutral or 
negative in nature, and minor, medium or major in terms of scale. 
Review and Mitigation 
Reconsideration was given to any objective or associated action where the Assessment Process 
identified a potential negative impact with respect to any of six horizontal priorities. Where possi­
ble, mitigation measures were considered to ameliorate particular negative impacts.
Horizontal Priorities 
The six horizontal priorities against which the Cork Draft LECP has been proofed are considered to 
be particularly appropriate for the profile of Cork as outlined in the Socio-Economic Statement/ 
Background Consultation Document June 2015 and as an outcome from the public consultation 
process. 
Horizontal Priority 1: Sustainability 
It is accepted that the scope of sustainability is particularly broad, and tie together the dimensions 
Our Sustainable Future: A Framework for Sustainable Development 
for Ireland’ defines sustainable development as that which …’takes 
place where there is economic stability based on a model of 
national progress and development that respects the three core 
pillars of sustainability: the environment, the economic and the 
social.

244
of the environment, the local economy and the community. In the context of sustainability, eight 
proofing tools were employed in the preparation of the Cork DRAFT LECP. These were identified as 
encompassing the capacity to focus on the likely key challenges presented by the implementation 
of Cork DRAFT LECP. 
Sustainability Proofing Tools
Our Sustainable Future’*
Cork County LECP 2016
Themes
Principles
Proofing Summary
Economy.
Promote an innovative, 
competitive and 
low-carbon economy with 
the aim of achieving smart, 
sustainable and inclusive 
growth. 
The LECP will work with all of 
the key agencies in the targeted 
development of the economy. 
In so far as is practicable, the 
actions supported by the LECP 
and its implementation partners 
will promote the prudent use of 
resources and technologies to 
support an innovative, low-carbon 
economy. 
Satisfaction of human needs by 
the efficient use of resources.
Prices should reflect the real 
costs to society of production 
and consumption activities and 
polluters should pay for the 
damage they cause to human 
health and the environment.
Many of the economically biased 
actions of the LECP will be delivered 
through Cork County Council 
or other agencies that are fully 
conversant with the principles 
of avoiding of ameliorating any 
potential for damage to the natural 
environment or human health.
Equity between generations.
The needs of current 
generations should 
be addressed without 
compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their 
needs
The LECP is fundamentally 
concerned with the sustainable use 
of the environment and the need 
protect it for future generations. 
Resources should be used 
within the capacity for 
regeneration.
In so far as is practicable, the 
actions supported by the LECP and 
its implementation partners will 
promote the use of sustainable 
resources.
Gender equity.
Women have a vital role in 
environmental management 
and development and their 
full participation is therefore 
essential to advance 
sustainable development.
The LECP notes that women are 
one of the key target groups who 
will be positively supported by the 
platform of actions.

245
Local Economic And Community Plan
Respect for ecological integrity 
and biodiversity
The abundance of wildlife and 
extent of habitats should be 
maintained, improved and 
restored where necessary, 
through sustainable 
management.
The LECP is fundamentally 
concerned with the sustainable use 
of the environment and will address 
any matters that might adversely 
impact on the natural environment.
Social equity.
Social inclusion should be 
promoted to ensure an 
improved quality of life for all.
The community dimensions of 
the LECP are built upon a full 
understanding of social inclusion 
principles and has included Social 
Inclusion as a key asset for Cork
Respect for cultural heritage 
and diversity.
The quality of landscapes, the 
heritage of the man-made 
environment and historic and 
cultural resources should be 
maintained and improved.
The actions of the LECP are 
designed to recognise the quality of 
the natural and built environment of 
the county. Where development of 
the natural, historical and cultural 
aspects of the county is supported, 
the actions will be fully compliant 
with all of the requisite permissions 
that protect their integrity.
Equity between countries and 
regions.
Promote fundamental rights, 
by combating all forms of 
discrimination and contributing 
to the reduction of poverty.
The community dimensions of 
the LECP are built upon a full 
understanding of social inclusion 
principles. The LECP recognises 
that Corks key assets include Social 
Inclusion and Multiculturalism.
Promote coherence between 
local, regional, national, EU 
and global actions in order to 
increase their contribution to 
sustainable development. 
The LECP is fundamentally 
concerned with the better use of 
resources and the need to create 
coherence between all levels of 
actions. 
Good decision-making. 
Guarantee citizens’ rights of 
access to information and 
public participation procedures. 
Ensure access to review 
mechanisms. Develop adequate 
consultation with stakeholders, 
including citizens’, businesses 
and social partners, and 
participatory channels for all 
interested parties. 
The community dimensions of 
the LECP are built upon a full 
understanding of social inclusion 
principles. The LECP recognises 
that Corks key assets include Social 
Inclusion and Multiculturalism.
* Our Sustainable Future: A Framework for Sustainable Development for Ireland, Irish Governement 
, 2012.

246
Horizontal Priority 2: Equality 
In 2008 the Equality Authority produced ‘An Equality Proofing Template for the City and County 
Development Boards’. The activity of the LCDC, and the purpose of the LECP are built upon the ex­
perience of the County Development Board, and in this context the Equality Proofing Template 
formed the basis of the adopted proofing process. 
The Equality Proofing Template introduced An Equality Impact Assessment as an instrument for 
assessing the impact of policy on agreed equality objectives and on specific groups experiencing 
inequality. It is based on an assessment of the impact on the relevant groups from within the nine 
grounds of equality.
Equality Proofing Tools
Nine Grounds of Equality
Commentary
Gender.
Both the economic and community dimensions of 
the LECP are built upon a full understanding of social 
inclusion principles and the need to uphold the 
equality of all within society. The LECP recognises 
that Corks key assets include Social Inclusion and 
Multiculturalism.
Marital Status.
Family Status.
Sexual Orientation.
Religious Belief.
Age.
Disability.
Race
Membership of the Traveller Community.
Horizontal Priority 3: Poverty 
The National Action Plan for Social Inclusion (NAPInclusion) 2007-2016 sets out a comprehensive 
programme of action to address poverty and social exclusion. It defines the situation of people 
living in poverty as instances where: ‘…their income and resources (material, cultural and social) are 
so inadequate as to preclude them from having a standard of living which is regarded as acceptable 
by Irish society generally. As a result of inadequate income and other resources people may be 
excluded and marginalised from participating in activities which are considered the norm for other 
people in society.’
Poverty Impact Assessment (formerly Poverty Proofing) was introduced in 1998 as a result of a 
commitment in the original National Anti-Poverty Strategy. The Department of Social Protection 
Poverty Impact Assessment Template was used as the basis for the poverty proofing process applied 
to the Cork DRAFT LECP. In particular, the high-level goals and objectives were used to assess the 
relevance to those groups who have been identified as being most vulnerable to poverty or social 
exclusion. Where possible, an assessment was made with respect to the potential impacts on ine­

247
Local Economic And Community Plan
qualities that might lead to poverty. 
Social Exclusion Proofing Tools
Groups Most Vulnerable to Poverty or Social 
Exclusion
Commentary
Women
Both the economic and community dimensions of 
the LECP are built upon a full understanding of social 
inclusion principles and the need to uphold the 
equality of all within society. The LECP recognises 
that Corks key assets include Social Inclusion and 
Multiculturalism.
The LECP contains a number of key actions that 
are specifically designed to support a positive 
engagement with those who are socially excluded. 
The LECP recognises that Corks key assets include 
Social Inclusion and Multiculturalism.
Lone Parent Families
Families with Large Numbers of Children 
People with Disabilities
Unemployed
Members of the Travelling Community
People Experiencing Rural Disadvantage
People Experiencing Urban Poverty
Homeless
Migrants and Ethnic Minorities
Horizontal Priority 4: Rurality 
There is no single agreed definition of ‘rurality’. The CSO Census of Population designates all those 
living in settlements of less than 1,500 inhabitants as the ‘rural population’. The category of ‘aggre­
gate rural areas’ includes villages of fewer than 1,500 residents, together with those living in the 
‘open countryside’.
 
The Operating Rules for the Rural Development Programme (September 2015) note that for the 
purposes of implementing the Programme, rural areas are defined as all parts of Ireland outside 
the city boundaries of Dublin, Waterford, Cork, Limerick and Galway.
The Research Report of the Commission on the Economic Development of Rural Areas (CEDRA) notes 
that the collapse in domestic demand has disproportionally affected rural towns. The associated 
CEDRA report entitled ‘Energising Ireland’s Rural Economy’ provides the following vision for rural 
Ireland: ‘Rural Ireland will become a dynamic, adaptable and outward looking multi-sectoral economy 
supporting vibrant, resilient and diverse communities experiencing a high quality of life with an 
energised relationship between rural and urban Ireland which will contribute to its sustainability 
for the benefit of society as a whole.’ The report continues: ‘If we are to pull Ireland out of recession 

248
faster, and also reduce the brain drain leaving the country to seek out work, then we now need to 
home in on the regions……….. We need to provide ‘on the ground’ supports for people in rural com­
munities. This is so they can create ideas and spot opportunities to develop enterprises. The positive 
spin-offs could be new job creation at the local level, taking people off the dole, and generating 
local wealth that feeds back into rural economies.’ 
‘Thinking Rural: The Essential Guide to Rural Proofing’ notes the importance of considering the 
impact of proposed policies and actions on rural areas. It further notes that policies and actions 
should treat rural areas in a fair or reasonable way: not that rural areas should have an equal level 
of resources as urban, but rather that proportionality should apply to rural areas, taking into account 
their unique characteristics. 
‘Rural Poverty and Social Exclusion on the Island of Ireland – Context, Policies and Challenges’ 
identifies key groups at risk of poverty in rural areas, and many of these definitions were used to 
proof the goals and objectives of Cork DRAFT LECP.
Rural Proofing Tools
Group/Issue
Summary of Issues
Commentary
Older People
Aging population, many of 
whom may  have a disability.  
Will be impacted by pensioner 
poverty.  Specific concerns in 
relation to isolation and access 
to and quality of services. 
Both the economic and community 
dimensions of the LECP are built 
upon a full understanding of social 
inclusion principles and the need 
to uphold the equality of all within 
society. 
The LECP contains a number of 
key actions that are specifically 
designed to support a positive 
engagement with those who 
are socially excluded. The LECP 
recognises that Corks key assets 
include Social Inclusion and 
Multiculturalism.
Children and Young People 
Isolation, limited access to plan 
and social activities (facilities 
then to be focused in relatively 
population dense areas) lack of 
childcare, lack of employment 
and education opportunities for 
parents. 

249
Local Economic And Community Plan
Women
Poverty has a gender dimension 
and in rural areas there are 
specific issues linked to access. 
Those most at risk of poverty 
include lone parents (the 
majority of whom are female), 
those with a disability, minority 
ethnic women and older 
women. 
Both the economic and community 
dimensions of the LECP are built 
upon a full understanding of social 
inclusion principles and the need 
to uphold the equality of all within 
society. 
The LECP contains a number of 
key actions that are specifically 
designed to support a positive 
engagement with those who 
are socially excluded. The LECP 
recognises that Corks key assets 
include Social Inclusion and 
Multiculturalism.
Disability
A person who is socially 
excluded is at greater risk 
of becoming disabled and 
someone who becomes 
disabled is at greater risk of 
becoming social excluded. 
The experience of poverty 
for people with a disability in 
rural areas is shaped by access 
within the home and access 
to and information on quality 
services 
Farmers and Farm Families
Farming is the backbone of 
economic activity in rural 
Ireland. The farming and agri-
food sector is Ireland’s largest 
indigenous productive sector. 
Rural Ireland is unique by 
European standards with over 
440,000 families choosing to 
live in the countryside and 
contribute to sustainable 
communities. However, 
there are many challenges. 
Communications infrastructure 
such as broadband is totally 
inadequate; rural roads are 
often left unmaintained for 
long periods and rural security 
continues to be a real concern. 

250
Carers
Low pay coupled with high 
transport costs, high costs of 
goods and services and cultural 
pressures in rural areas mean 
that many rural carers live in 
poverty. 
Careers in rural areas find it 
difficult to combine paid work 
or training and care due to the 
lack of transport and difficulties 
obtaining support services. 
Horizontal Priority 5: Age 
It is a requirement of the LECP to be cognisant of all people in society both young and old and 
significant consideration has to given to how best to proof the differing needs of both young and 
older generations.
Young People 
The National Strategy on Children and Young People’s Participation in Decision-Making 2015-2018 
is designed to ensure that children and young people have a voice in their individual and collective 
everyday lives across the five national outcome areas set out in Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures: 
The National Policy Framework for Children and Young People, 2014-2020. The national outcomes 
areas are: 
1. To be active and healthy;
2.	To be achieving in all areas of learning and development;
3.	To be safe and protected from harm;
4.	To enjoy economic security and opportunity; and
5.	To be connected, respected and contributing.
The strategy focuses on the everyday lives of children and young people and the places and spaces 
in which they are entitled to have a voice in decisions that affect their lives, including in communi­
ty, education, health and well-being, and legal settings. It is primarily aimed at children and young 
people under the age of 18, but also embraces the voice of young people in the transition to 
adulthood. It is guided and influenced by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 
and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Compliance with the five national outcome areas of the National Strategy was used to proof the 
objectives and actions of the Cork DRAFT LECP in respect of young people’s participation.
Older People 
Demographic aging is a characteristic of the State that will, over time, impact upon Cork. The Cork 

251
Local Economic And Community Plan
county Council document ‘Services and infrastructure for Older Persons’ Strategy, 2014 noted the 
importance of the following issues for older people in the county: 
▯
Participation and Opportunity for older persons;
▯
Support for Healthy aging;
▯
Housing, accommodation and the built environment;
▯
Research and evidence to better inform policy responses to the needs of an aging population;
Cork County Councils –‘‘Services and infrastructure for Older Persons’ Strategy’, 2014, was used as 
the primary tool for proofing the objectives and actions of the Cork DRAFT LECP in respect of aging 
persons s participation
Horizontal Priority 6: Disability & Accessibility
Cork DRAFT LECP was proofed for disability using the process provided in the Guidelines for Gov­
ernment Departments: ‘How to Conduct a Disability Impact Assessment’. 
A Disability Impact Assessment was undertaken on the Objectives of the Cork DRAFT LECP. The 
Disability Impact Assessment was used to identify any difficulties or barriers that might exist or 
arise within the framework of the objective, and that might inadvertently impact negatively on a 
person with a disability. 
The five-step Disability Impact Assessment, as identified in the Guidelines, was applied to the 
Objectives and Actions of the LECP. 
Step 1: Initial assessment if the likelihood of an impact on people with disabilities; 
Step 2: Evidence base for the initial assessment of potential impact; 
Step 3: Definition of the likely impact for people with disabilities; 
Step 4: Amelioration factors to be applied where the potential impact for people with 
 disabilities is negative; and 
Step 5: The extent to which monitoring of the impact for people with disabilities is being 
  implemented. 
Compliance with the five-step Disability Impact Assessment, as identified in the Guidelines was 
used to proof the objectives and actions of the Cork DRAFT LECP in respect to disability.

252
APPENDIX 7 
PUBLIC CONSULTATION TO DATE
This draft plan has been underpinned by a wide range of public consultation, with individuals, or­
ganisations, stakeholders and delivery agencies. Consultation was facilitated within both the eco­
nomic and community spheres, as well as within the public and private sectors.  
The initial public consultation stage for the LECP took place from 2nd June to the 10th of July 2015.
Advertisement:
The public consultation stage was advertised through a number of media:
▯
Launch of web-page in County Hall;
▯
An advertisement was placed in a number of Newspapers circulating locally;
▯
A notice was placed on the Cork County Council website;
▯
Notification was issued through Cork County Council’s twitter feed;
▯
Notification was issued through Cork County Council’s Facebook account;
▯
Prescribed authorities were notified;
▯
Radio Advert;
▯
Presentation of Process to Strategic Policy Committees and Public Participation Net­
works.
Notifications:
List of Prescribed Authorities and other Bodies notified of Commencement of LECP Review 
 Bodies 
No. notified 
Notified by
List of Prescribed Bodies Notified 
78
Letter
PPN
734
Flyer/Email
Economic Stakeholders
252
Letter
Community and Voluntary Stakeholders  List
70
Flyer/Email
Total notified 
1134

253
Local Economic And Community Plan
Public Consultation Events :
A series of day (community and economic) conferences and public information evenings were held 
in order to provide an opportunity for members of the public to learn about the LECP process, to 
highlight some of the strategic issues facing the county and facilitate feedback from the public 
about issues they felt should be taken into account in the preparation of the draft LECP. 
Day conferences and public information evenings were held in the following locations:
▯
County Hall  - 11 June 2015
▯
Douglas: Rochestown Park Hotel - 16 June 2015  
▯
Skibbereen: West Cork Hotel - 17 June 2015  
▯
Mallow: Mallow GAA Sports Complex - 18 June 2015
Date 
Location of Event 
Day Events 
Evening 
11 June 2015
County Hall 
9
N/a 
16 June 2015 
Douglas: Rochestown 
Park Hotel 
85
6
17 June 2015 
Skibbereen: West Cork 
Hotel
38
4
18 June 2015
Mallow: Mallow GAA 
Sports Complex
35
5
167
15
Note: A number of Key 
Stakeholders ( e.g. Cork 
Chamber, NTA, CIT, Cork 
Airport, etc) have also met 
with the project team via 
individual meetings. 
Submissions Received :
Breakdown 
Submissions 
Received
Type 
Number 
South  
West
North 
Statutory Bodies
6 
n/a
n/a
n/a

254
Citizen
11
5
1
0
Economic 
6
1
1
1
Community
66 
27
19
7
Sectoral 
15
0
0
9
Total  of 104 
submissions 
Geographical Representation of Submissions
North Cork
17 
South Cork
33
West Cork
21
Other/General
33
Total
104 new total 
Economic Consultation Events :
Three economic focussed breakfast consultation events were held in County Hall, as follows:
October 22nd 2015 at 7:30am
October 30th 2015 at 7:30am
December 1st 2015 at 9:00am
At these events, attendees were allocated to a specific facilitator who guided a targeted discussion 
regarding economic growth within Cork. The issues raised at these events were used to underpin 
the identification of Cork’s Key Assets and initial actions. 
92 representatives from a wide range of sectors attended these events. 

255
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
20 Year Strategy for the Irish Language 2010-2030
▯
▯
2011 Census Area Profile for County Cork
▯
▯
A National Aviation Policy for Ireland - 2015.
▯
▯
Action Plan for Jobs 2015
▯
▯
Action Plan for Jobs for South West Region 2015
▯
▯
Action Programme for Effective Local Government – Putting People First
▯
▯
An Overview of the Irish Forestry and Forest Products Sector – 2013 (IFFPA, IBEC)
▯
▯
An Overview of the Irish Forestry and Forest Products Sector 2013 
▯
▯
Annual Report of the Department of the Environment, Community and Local Govern­
ment 2014
▯
▯
Apprenticeship Implementation Plan
▯
▯
Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures (National Policy Framework for Children & Young 
People 2014-2020) 
▯
▯
Building Ireland’s Smart Economy 2010
▯
▯
Building on Recovery: Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2016-2021. 
▯
▯
CEDRA – Energising Ireland’s Rural Economy (Report of the Commission for the Eco­
nomic Development of Rural Areas) 
▯
▯
Census of Agriculture 2010 – Final Results
▯
▯
Children First – National Guidance for the Protection & Welfare of Children (DCYA)
▯
▯
Circular LG/1/2015 AL/1/2015 Local Economic and Community Plans (2015). 
▯
▯
Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Bill 2015
▯
▯
Construction 2020 – A Strategy for a Renewed Construction Sector
▯
▯
Cork Area Strategic Plan 2001 – 2020 & Update 2008
▯
▯
Cork City Development Plan 2015
▯
▯
Cork County Council Major Emergency Plan
▯
▯
Cork County Development Plan 2015
▯
▯
Cork County Local Area Plans 2011
▯
▯
Cork Economic Forum Outputs 2014
▯
▯
Cork Gateway Report 2013
▯
▯
Cork Tourism Strategy 2016. Growing Tourism in Cork a collective Strategy.
▯
▯
Cork’s Agri-Food & Drinks Opportunities – Cork Chamber, 2014
▯
▯
Corporate Social Responsibility Plan, Good for Business, Good for the Community 
2014-2016
▯
▯
Costs of Doing Business in Ireland 2014
▯
▯
County Cork Local Sports Partnership Strategic Plan
▯
▯
County Incomes and Regional GDP Reports (CSO)
▯
▯
Craft Council of Ireland’s Strategic Plan 2013-2015 
APPENDIX 8
LECP BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS

256
▯
▯
DECLG Housing Policy Statement 2011 
▯
▯
Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS) (2005)
▯
▯
Delivering our Green Potential – Government Policy Statement on Growth and Em­
ployment in the Green Economy
▯
▯
Department of Justice and Equality Strategy Statement 2015-2017
▯
▯
Department of the Environment, Community & Local Government’s Strategy State­
ment (2011 – 2014) 
▯
▯
Developing the Arts - Arts Council Strategic Statement - 2013.
▯
▯
Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004
▯
▯
Employment Equality Acts 1998–2015 and the Equal Status Acts 2000–2015
▯
▯
Europe 2020 
▯
▯
European Convention on Human Rights
▯
▯
Evaluation of Enterprise Supports for Start-Ups and Entrepreneurship
▯
▯
Fact Sheet on Irish Agriculture – October 2014
▯
▯
Family Structures in Ireland: 2011 – ESRI/UCD
▯
▯
Five Year Strategy for Further Education and Training (2014-2019) 
▯
▯
Food Harvest 2020
▯
▯
Foreign Languages in Education Strategy
▯
▯
Forestry Programme 2014 -2020
▯
▯
Forfas Regional Competitiveness Agendas – South West
▯
▯
Further Education and Training Strategy 2014-2019
▯
▯
Garda Recorded Crime Statistics 2008-2012
▯
▯
Gateways and Hubs Development Index 2012
▯
▯
Government’s Action Plan for Jobs 2012 & Pathways to Work 2013 
▯
▯
Government’s Infrastructure and Capital Investment Programme and associated 
strategies (e.g. Health Strategy, Childcare Strategy, National Anti-Poverty Strategy) 
▯
▯
Green Paper on Energy Policy in Ireland - 2014
▯
▯
Harnessing Our Ocean Wealth – An Integrated Marine Plan for Ireland, 2012
▯
▯
Harvest 2020
▯
▯
Healthy Ireland – A Framework for Improved Health and Well-being 2013-2025
▯
▯
Homelessness Policy Statement 2013 – 2016 (DECLG) 
▯
▯
Horizon 2020 – IDA Ireland Strategy 
▯
▯
Human Rights and Equality Act 2014
▯
▯
ICT Skills Action Plan 2014-2018
▯
▯
Implementation Plan on the State’s Response to Homelessness 2014–2016 (DECLG) 
▯
▯
Integration, Multiculturalism & Combating Racism
▯
▯
Intercultural Education Strategy, 2010-2015
▯
▯
Ireland National Climate Change Strategy 2007 – 2012
▯
▯
Ireland’s Forestry Programme – 2014-2020
▯
▯
Ireland’s Forests – Annual Statistics, 2014
▯
▯
Ireland’s Greenhouse Gas Emission Projections 2012-2030
▯
▯
Ireland’s National Skills Strategy 2025
▯
▯
Ireland’s Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 2015 – 2030

257
Local Economic And Community Plan
▯
▯
Irelands Competitiveness Scorecard 2014
▯
▯
Irelands National Reform Programme 2015
▯
▯
Irelands National Traveller/Roma Integration Strategy 2011-2016 
▯
▯
Jobs and Growth 2010
▯
▯
Joint Housing Strategy (Cork Planning Authorities)
▯
▯
Literacy and Numeracy for Learning and Life Strategy
▯
▯
Local Government ICT Strategy Implementation Plan 
▯
▯
Local Government Reform Act 2014 (S.44 – 46) & DECLG Circular LG 1/2015 of 
21/01/2015 
▯
▯
Local Government Sectoral Strategy to Promote Employment and Support Local En­
terprise - Supporting Economic Recovery and Jobs
▯
▯
Making it Happen – Growing Enterprise for Ireland
▯
▯
Making Life Better – strategic framework 2013-2015
▯
▯
Medium Term Economic Strategy 2014-2020
▯
▯
Mental Health – A Vision for Change
▯
▯
National Access Plan 2015-2019
▯
▯
National Action Plan for Social Inclusion 2007-2016
▯
▯
National Biodiversity Plan 2011-2016
▯
▯
National Children’s Strategy
▯
▯
National Climate Change Adaptation Framework 2012
▯
▯
National Climate Change Strategy 2007-2013
▯
▯
National Digital Strategy -  “Phase 1 - Digital Engagement” 2013
▯
▯
National Disability Strategy – Implementation Plan 2013-2015
▯
▯
National Drugs Strategy (Interim) 2009-2016
▯
▯
National Enterprise Policy 2015-2025
▯
▯
National Higher Education Strategy to 2030
▯
▯
National Housing Strategy for People with a Disability 2011 – 2016 (DECLG) 
▯
▯
National Policy Framework for Children 2014 – 2020 (Dept. Children & Youth Affairs) 
▯
▯
National Positive Ageing Strategy - April 2013
▯
▯
National Reform Programme for Ireland
▯
▯
National Spatial Strategy 2002-2020
▯
▯
National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030
▯
▯
National Strategy on Education for Sustainable Development
▯
▯
National Women’s Strategy 2007-2016
▯
▯
National Youth Strategy 2015-2020
▯
▯
Needs Analysis for the ERDF and ESF Co-Financed Operational Programmes 2014-2020
▯
▯
OECD Report on Local Development
▯
▯
Our Cities: Drivers of National Competitiveness - 2009
▯
▯
Our Sustainable Future – A Framework for Sustainable Development for Ireland 2012
▯
▯
People, Place and Policy. Growing Tourism to 2025
▯
▯
Planning Policy Statement 2015
▯
▯
Policy Statement on Foreign Direct Investment in Ireland
▯
▯
Polish Migration to Ireland – Antje Roeder

258
▯
▯
Promotion of Equality in the Delivery of the Local Economic and Community Plan 
(LECPs) - 2015
▯
▯
Reach Out – Irish National Strategy for Action on Suicide Prevention 2005-2014
▯
▯
Regional Labour Markets Bulletin 2014
▯
▯
Regional Operational Programmes 2014 – 2020 for NUTS 2 Areas
▯
▯
Regional Planning Guidelines for NUTS 3 Areas
▯
▯
Regional Tourism Performance in 2013, Failte Ireland
▯
▯
Report of the High Level Group on Traveller Issues 2006
▯
▯
Report on Growth & Employment in the Green Economy in Ireland - 2013 
▯
▯
Report on Retention Rates of Pupils in Second Level Schools in 2014
▯
▯
Review of Business Mentoring Services in Ireland
▯
▯
Rural Development Programme (LEADER) 2014-2020 
▯
▯
Social Housing Strategy 2020 (DECLG) 
▯
▯
South West Action Plan for Jobs 2015-2017
▯
▯
Southern Region Waste Management Plan 2015-2021
▯
▯
Southern Regional Assembly OP 2014-2020
▯
▯
Special Local Area Plan for Cork Airport - 2010
▯
▯
Strategy for Renewable Energy  2012 – 2020
▯
▯
Strategy for Science, Technology and Innovation 2006-2013
▯
▯
Supporting Enterprise, Local Development & Economic Growth (Analysis of Local Au­
thority Activities) 
▯
▯
The 2011 Pobal HP Deprivation Index for Small Areas (SA)
▯
▯
The Arts in Irish Life 2014, Arts Council
▯
▯
The Effects of Investing in Early Education on Economic Growth - Brookings Institu­
tion
▯
▯
The National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030
▯
▯
The National Strategy to Improve Literacy and Numeracy Among Children and Young 
People 2011-2020
▯
▯
This is Ireland - Highlights from Census 2011
▯
▯
Tourism Facts 2013, Failte Ireland
▯
▯
Towards 2016 (Ten Year Framework for Social Partnership Agreement 2006 – 2015) 
▯
▯
Towards a National Planning Framework
▯
▯
Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  - UN
▯
▯
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2014 – 2018 (DECLG) 
▯
▯
Understanding Contemporary Ireland
▯
▯
West Cork Islands Integrated Development Strategy Document
▯
▯
Some Illustrations supplied by www.freepik.com
▯
▯
European Regional Development Fund 2014 – 2020
▯
▯
Innovation 2020: Ireland’s Strategy for Research and Development, Science and Tech­
nology
▯
▯
Spatial Planning and national Roads Guidelines for Planning Authorities (DoELG, 
2012) 

Cork County Council Headquarters,
County Hall, Carrigrohane Road, Cork, Ireland.
 Telephone: (021) 427 6891
Email: corporateaffairs@corkcoco.ie
www.corkcoco.ie
Local Economic And Community Plan
