1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CONTAE FHINE GALL 
 
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 2024 
 

2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
MEETINGS...........................................................................................................................5 
QUORUM............................................................................................................................5 
ATTENDANCE/RECORD OF ATTENDANCE.......................................................................6 
DECLARATION OF INTEREST.............................................................................................7 
ANNUAL MEETINGS …………………………………………………………………………………………….7 
ELECTION OF MAYOR/CATHAOIRLAIGH..………………………………………………………………7 
COUNCIL/COMMITTEE ORDINARY MEETING TIMES ………………….…………………………..8 
 
CONSTITUTION OF MEETINGS………………………………………………………………………………9 
 
NOTICE OF MEETINGS………………………………………………………………………………………….9 
 
SPECIAL MEETINGS……………………………………………………………………………………………..10 
 
ORDER OF BUSINESS…………………………………………………………………………………………..10 
 
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES……………………………………………………………………………..11  
 
QUESTIONS ....................................................................................................................... 12 
 
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ........................................................... 13 
 
MANAGEMENT REPORTS / CHIEF EXECUTIVE REPORT .................................................. 13 
 
BUSINESS OF THE MAYOR/CATHAOIRLEACH ................................................................ 14 
 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS…………………………………………………………………………..……………..14 
 
MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE ………………………………………………………………………………15 
 
EMERGENCY MOTION…………………………………………………………………………………………16 
 
SIMILAR OR RESCINDING MOTIONS…………………………………………………………………….16 
 
MOTION TO RECONSIDER…………………………………………………………………………………...16 
 
AMENDMENTS TO MOTIONS .......................................................................................... 17 
 
RULES OF DEBATE ............................................................................................................. 18 
 
DETERMINATION/VOTING…………………………………………………………………………………..19 
 
COMMITTEES ..................................................................................................................... 20 
 

3 
 
MAKING OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN ………………………………………………………………………21 
 
VARIATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN ………………………………………………………………….21 
 
LOCAL AREA PLANS ……………………………………………………………………………………………22 
 
ACCEPTANCE OF OFFICE, RESIGNATION, VACANCIES, ETC. ......................................... 22 
 
MAKING OF APPOINTMENTS ………………………………………………………………………………22 
 
REPRESENTATIVES AT CONGRESS, ETC. .......................................................................... 23 
 
DEPUTATIONS ................................................................................................................... 23 
 
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATIONS…………………………………………………………………………….23 
 
COMMON SEAL ................................................................................................................. 24 
 
VISITORS ............................................................................................................................ 24 
 
GRANTING OF CIVIC HONOURS ………………………………………………………………………….25 
 
MOBILE PHONES / SOCIAL MEDIA .................................................................................. 25 
 
MEDIA………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..25 
 
REMOTE/HYBRID MEETING………………………………………………………………………………….25 
 
INTERPRETATION OF STANDING ORDERS ..................................................................... 26 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS ………………………………………………………………….26 
 
MATTERS NOT COVERED BY STANDING ORDERS .......................................................... 26 
 
AMENDMENT OF STANDING ORDERS…………………………………………………………………..26 
 
DURATION OF STANDING ORDERS ................................................................................. 26 
  
 

4 
 
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
STANDING ORDERS 
 
 
1. 
In these Orders "Council" means "The Council of the Administrative County of Fingal." 
 
2. 
"Councillor" means a person elected or co-opted to the office of Councillor of the 
Administrative County of Fingal. 
 
3. 
"Representative" means a person nominated by their Organisation and appointed to the 
position of representative of Strategic Policy Committee by the elected Members of Fingal 
County Council. 
 
4. 
"Member" means a person elected or co-opted to the office of Councillor or selected to the 
position of representative of a Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
5. 
“Mayor/Méara” means Mayor/Méara so elected at the Annual Meeting. 
 
6. 
"Cathaoirleach" means the Councillor presiding at any meeting of the Council or of a 
Committee or Sub-Committee, Corporate Policy Group, Area Committee or Strategic Policy 
Committee. 
 
7. 
The "Chief Executive" means the Chief Executive for the Administrative County of Fingal or, in 
their absence, their duly appointed Deputy. 
 
8. 
The membership of the Council shall consist of the Councillors of Fingal County Council. 
 
9. 
The membership of the Corporate Policy Group shall consist only of the Mayor of the Council 
and each Cathaoirleach of the Strategic Policy Committees. 
 
10. 
The membership of each Area Committee shall consist only of the Councillors for the Electoral 
Area represented by that Area Committee. 
 
11. 
a) Each Member of the Council shall be a member of at least one Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
               b)  The membership of each Strategic Policy Committee shall consist only of the Councillors 
selected by the Council to that Strategic Policy Committee and the representatives nominated 
by their organisations and appointed by the Council to that Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
12. 
In counting clear days, where the number of days’ notice does not exceed seven, Sundays 
and Christmas Day are not counted.  If notice exceeds seven days, Sundays and Christmas 
Day are to be counted.  Unless otherwise stated, the word "month" when used in resolutions 
of the Council, Standing Orders and regulations of the Council, shall mean a calendar month. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
MEETINGS 
 
13. 
The Members of Fingal County Council will meet as set out below: 
 
a) 
Annual General Meeting - Annually 
b) 
Budget Meeting – Annually and as required. 
c) 
Ordinary Meeting – Monthly 
d) 
Special Meetings – As required / requisitioned as per these Standing Orders 
 
14. 
The Standing Committees of the Council are established as follows: 
 
a) 
Corporate Policy Group. 
b) 
The Organisation, Procedures & Finance Committee 
c) 
Community Development, Heritage, Culture & Creativity Strategic Policy Committee 
d) 
Transport and Infrastructure Management Strategic Infrastructure Policy Committee 
e) 
Economic Enterprise and Tourism Development Strategic Policy Committee 
f) 
Housing Strategic Policy Committee 
g) 
Climate Action, Biodiversity, Environment Strategic Policy Committee 
h) 
Planning Strategic, Transport & Infrastructure Development Strategic Policy 
Committee 
i) 
Marine and Coastal Management Strategic Policy Committee 
j) 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Area Committee 
k) 
Howth/Malahide Area Committee 
l) 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee 
 
 Standing Committees will meet as set out in these Standing Orders, as agreed by resolution 
of the Council, and as may be agreed by the Committees. 
 
15. 
An Audit Committee is established as per the Regulations governing the business of Audit 
Committees and is subject to such Standing Orders specific to the Audit Committee as agreed 
by resolution of the Council. 
 
 
QUORUM 
 
16. 
At meetings of the Council, eleven Councillors shall be a quorum.  
 
17. 
At meetings of the Corporate Policy Group, three Members shall be a quorum.  
 
18. 
At meetings of the Area Committees the quorum will be as follows: 
a) 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords – 6 Councillors 
b) 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar – 5 Councillors 
c) 
Howth/Malahide – 3 Councillors 
 
19. 
At meetings of the Strategic Policy Committees, the quorum will be as follows: 
a) 
Economic Enterprise and Tourism Development SPC – 5 Members, two of whom shall 
be Councillors 
b) 
Housing SPC – 5 Members, two of whom shall be Councillors 
c) 
Planning Strategic, Transport & Infrastructure Development SPC – 4 Members, two 
of whom shall be Councillors 

6 
 
d) 
Transport and Infrastructure Management SPC- 4 Members, two of whom shall be 
Councillors  
e) 
Climate Action, Biodiversity, Environment SPC- 4 Members, two of whom shall be 
Councillors 
f) 
Community Development, Heritage, Culture & Creativity SPC- 4 Members, two of 
whom shall be Councillors  
g) 
Marine and Coastal Management SPC – 6 Members, three of whom shall be 
Councillors  
 
20. 
Subject to the provisions of Standing Order Nos. 18, 19 and 20, the quorum for any other 
Committee of the Council (including sub-committees) shall be not less than one quarter of 
the membership of such Committee or three Members, whichever is the greater, two of 
whom must be Councillors provided however, that should the membership of any such 
Committee be less than eight, the quorum shall be two, one of whom shall be a Councillor.  
If, after fifteen minutes of the published start time for a meeting, a quorum is not present, 
the business shall be postponed to the next meeting or to a date and time specified by the 
Cathaoirleach of that Committee on the day the meeting has fallen.  If no such date and 
time is specified, then a Motion signed by a quorum of the Committee, giving at least five 
days’ notice of the date and time of the proposed meeting, shall serve to cause the 
Committee to reconvene at the date and time specified in the Motion. 
 
21. 
When, during any meeting, it is stated by a Member to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach, that less 
than the quorum of Members are present, the Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall adjourn the 
meeting for a maximum of five minutes after which the Meetings Administrator shall call the 
roll and shall record the names of the Members in attendance, and when it appears that the 
number of Members present is less than the quorum the meeting shall rise and the business 
not disposed of by such meeting shall be set down to be disposed of at the next meeting. 
Whenever a meeting of the Local Authority is abandoned owing to failure to obtain a 
quorum the names of those present at the time and place appointed for such meeting 
shall be recorded by the Meetings Administrator and they shall for all purposes be deemed 
to have attended the meeting. 
 
 
ATTENDANCE / RECORD OF ATTENDANCE 
 
22. 
Every Member physically attending a meeting shall sign their name in the attendance book 
provided for the purpose. Members attending remotely will have their attendance recorded 
by the roll call and/or by record of the virtual forum being used for the meeting. 
 
The Mayor/Cathaoirleach will at the outset and at any reconvening of a meeting call for a roll 
call of participating members and ensure that they can see and/or hear those in attendance.  
Any Member participating remotely shall also confirm at the outset and at any reconvening 
of the meeting that they can see and/or hear the proceedings. The minutes of each meeting 
shall be the official record of such attendances.  
 
Each Member participating remotely shall ensure that there are no other persons present 
who are not entitled to be either hearing or seeing consideration of such items, and/or 
recording the proceedings, in accordance with Standing Orders that apply. 
 
Members leaving the meeting should advise the Mayor/Cathaoirleach. Should a Member(s) 
remote connection fail the meeting should continue, provided the meeting remains quorate. 

7 
 
If the connection is successfully re-established, then the remote Member(s) will be deemed 
to have returned at the point of re-establishment. 
 
 
DECLARATION OF INTEREST 
 
23. 
No Member shall attend a meeting of the Council, a Committee or Sub-Committee or 
section of a Sub-Committee during the consideration of any matter in which they have a 
pecuniary or professional interest. The Member shall disclose the nature of his or her 
interest to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach and the Meeting Administrator at or prior to the 
meeting before discussion or consideration of the matter commences.  Any Member who 
declares a disclosable pecuniary or other beneficial interest in any item of business that 
would require them to leave the meeting must advise the Mayor/Cathaoirleach and 
Members at the time of departure and this shall be recorded in the minutes.  Their 
departure will be confirmed by the Meeting Administrator, who will invite the relevant 
member to re-join the meeting at the appropriate time.  
 
24. 
No Member shall attend a meeting of the Council, a Committee or Sub-Committee or section 
of a Sub-Committee during the consideration of any matter in which any person, with whom 
the member has any immediate family/business relationship, is concerned. 
 
 
ANNUAL MEETINGS 
 
25.  
In every year in which a Local Election is held, the Annual meeting shall be held on the 14th 
day after polling day.  In every other year the Annual Meeting of the Council shall be held, in 
the month of May or June as the Members of the Council shall by resolution agree. 
 
26. 
At an Annual Meeting in an election year the Meetings Administrator shall read out the names 
of the persons duly elected as Members of the Local Authority. 
 
 
ELECTION OF MAYOR / CATHAOIRLAIGH 
 
27. 
The first business at every Annual Meeting of the Council shall be the election of the 
Mayor and Deputy Mayor and they shall come into office immediately after their election 
and shall, unless they earlier resign, continue in office (subject to their death, resignation, 
disqualification, removal from office or otherwise ceasing to be a Member of the Council) 
until their successor has been elected.  The procedure for the election of the Mayor is set 
out in Section 36 and 37 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
28. 
At each Annual Meeting, or at such meeting as may be agreed by resolution of the Members, 
the election of Cathaoirleach/Chairperson for each of the Area Committees shall take place. 
 
29. 
At the first Annual Meeting following the election of the Council, the election of 
Cathaoirleach/Chairperson for the Strategic Policy Committees shall be listed on the 
Agenda. 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
COUNCIL / COMMITTEE ORDINARY MEETING TIMES 
 
30. 
Ordinary monthly meetings of the Council shall be held on the second Monday of each month 
commencing at 5.00 p.m. to conclude at 8.00pm or at such other day or time as the Council, 
by resolution, may decide, except for July, when the monthly meeting shall be held on the first 
Monday of the month. 
 
31. 
The Council shall meet not less than once a month, but no ordinary meeting of the Council 
shall be held in August.  A Budget Meeting shall be held during the period prescribed by 
regulation. 
 
32. 
Ordinary meetings of the Standing Committees shall meet as follows, and on such days as 
agreed by the Council, unless otherwise determined by the Council: 
a) 
Corporate Policy Group shall meet at such days and times as agreed by the 
Committee and Mayor. 
b) 
Strategic Policy Committees shall meet quarterly at 4.30pm to conclude at 6.30pm 
or at a time agreed by the Committee except for the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee which starts at 4.00 pm and concludes at 6.00pm. 
c) 
Organisation, Procedures and Finance Committee during the following months – 
February, April, June, September, November and December - prior to a Council 
Meeting and at a time deemed necessary by the Mayor for the business of the 
meeting to be concluded. 
d) 
 Area Committees 
i) 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords monthly at 2.00pm. to conclude at 6.00pm 
ii) 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar twice monthly at 3.30pm 
to conclude at 6.00pm 
iii) 
Howth/Malahide monthly at 3.00pm to conclude at 6.00pm. 
 
33. 
When at a meeting of the Council, Corporate Policy Group, Organisation, Procedures and 
Finance Committee or Strategic Policy Committee all the business set down for such meeting 
has been transacted, the meeting shall then conclude without question from the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach, subject to the provision that all meetings of the Council shall terminate 
at a time not more than three hours from the time appointed for the commencement of that 
meeting.  Business not reached shall be listed on the agenda for the next meeting. Any motion 
included in such business may be withdrawn by the proposer on notification. 
 
34. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, voting in pursuance of proposals to put the motion 
or decisions to vote made before the time appointed for the termination of a meeting shall 
proceed. In such circumstances, the meeting shall terminate on declaration by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach of the results of such voting. 
 
35. 
The Mayor of the Council may decide, before the end of the Council meeting, and with the 
agreement of the majority of the Members present, to extend the current meeting or adjourn 
the Council meeting to a date before the next Council meeting, for the purpose of concluding 
some or all of the business set down for the Council meeting that has not been transacted. 
Any extension to a meeting should be for a specific time period. 
 
36. 
An ordinary meeting of an Area Committee shall finish when all the business for such meeting 
has been transacted, and if all the business has not been transacted by 6.00 p.m., the meeting 
shall end, and any outstanding business shall be dealt with at the next meeting of the 
Committee. 

9 
 
CONSTITUTION OF MEETINGS 
 
37. 
The Chair at every meeting shall be taken within ten minutes after the time set for the 
meeting.  In the absence of the Cathaoirleach of an Area Committee at its meeting, the 
majority vote of Councillors present shall decide who shall be Cathaoirleach.  In the case of 
meetings of the Strategic Policy Committees, the Cathaoirleach of the Strategic Policy 
Committee or in their absence some other Councillor - Member will take the Chair.  At all 
other meetings, in the absence of the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, a Councillor chosen by a 
majority of the Councillors present and voting at the commencement of business shall 
preside as Acting Cathaoirleach, and in that capacity shall have the same powers, rights and 
duties as are, under Standing Orders, possessed by the Mayor. 
 
38. 
If, after fifteen minutes after the published start time for a meeting, a quorum is not present, 
the business shall be postponed to the next meeting or to a date and time specified by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach of that Committee on the day the meeting has fallen.  If no such date 
and time is specified, then a Motion signed by a quorum of the Committee, giving at least 
five days’ notice of the date and time of the proposed meeting, shall serve to cause the 
Committee to reconvene at the date and time specified in the Motion. 
 
39. 
All meetings of the Council shall be at County Hall, Swords or at such other place as the 
Council may decide.  
Such other places may be at:  
• 
an external venue used to accommodate meetings of the Council. 
• 
an electronic, digital, or virtual location, web address or a conference call telephone 
number or a combination of the above to provide for physical and/or remote attendance 
by Elected Members. 
 
40. 
A meeting to be valid must be: 
 
(a) Properly convened after proper notice from the Meetings Administrator 
 
(b) Properly constituted; that is 
(i) 
With properly appointed person in the Chair 
 
 (ii) 
With a quorum present 
(iii) 
Must be held in accordance with Standing Orders, Articles or Regulations 
governing its Constitution. 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETINGS 
 
41. 
Public Notice of the place, date, and time of a meeting, other than a Local Authority Budget 
meeting, shall be displayed not less than three clear days before the day of the meeting in, or 
at the principal offices of the Local Authority in a position convenient for public inspection 
during normal office hours. 
 
The Notice shall include the agenda for the meeting or specify a place where the agenda can 
be inspected and in the case of a Special Meeting shall include or be accompanied by a copy 
of the requisition. 
 
42. 
An agenda paper setting out the business to be transacted shall be furnished to each Member 
three clear days before the date of a meeting. Members shall notify the Meetings 
Administrator in advance if they intend to attend the meeting remotely. 

10 
 
 
43. 
If a Member does not receive notice of a meeting it shall not affect the validity of the 
 
meeting. 
 
 
SPECIAL MEETINGS 
 
44. 
A Special Meeting of the Council, as it relates to the functions and activities of the 
Council, may be called at any time by the Mayor, or if the office of Mayor is vacant or the 
Mayor is unable to act, by the Deputy Mayor, of their own motion or upon a request 
addressed to them and signed by at least five Members of the Council.  
 
 
If the Mayor does not act on such request within seven days after its presentation, a Special 
Meeting for the purposes defined in it may be called by any five Members of the Council, on 
the expiration of these seven days, provided that not less than three clear days shall elapse 
between the date of the summons convening a Special Meeting and the date of the Special 
Meeting, and the meeting may be called for the time that the Mayor or Members request.  
 
During a Special Meeting all Standing Orders will apply (reference Standing Order No. 74 to 
78) 
 
 
ORDER OF BUSINESS 
 
45 a). 
The Order of Business at all but Special, Budget or Annual Meetings shall be as herein set 
down and shall only be altered in cases of urgent and important business and only then by a 
majority vote on suspension of Standing Orders or at the discretion of the Mayor.  The 
functions of meetings of the Council shall be comprised solely of reserved functions and 
policy matters affecting the whole county. 
 
a) 
Consideration of resolutions pursuant to Section 140 of the Local Government Act 
2001, as amended. 
b) 
Consideration of resolutions pursuant to Section 139 of the Local Government Act 
2001. 
c) 
Consideration of resolutions pursuant to Section 34(6) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000. 
d) 
Confirmation of Minutes. 
e) 
Appointment of Members to various Committees. 
f) 
Questions 
g) 
Consideration of reports of the Corporate Policy Group and Committees. 
h) 
Other business prescribed by Statute, Reserved Functions, Standing Orders or 
Resolution of the Council for transaction at that meeting. 
i) 
Business arising from the implementation of Section 44 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, or such other business as may, from time to time, become 
urgent for the implementation of the Council's powers in accordance with Statute. 
j) 
Headed Items/Business submitted by the Chief Executive. 
k) 
Chief Executives report – Will be taken as the last Headed Item on the Agenda 
l) 
Business submitted by the Mayor. 
m) 
Correspondence and matters not for discussion. 
n) 
Notices of Motion – Fingal County Council Statutory Functions –  
           Motions relating to matters that are within the direct control and statutory functions of 
Fingal County Council will be listed on the Agenda in the following order; 

11 
 
 
(i) 
Business not reached at previous meeting 
 
(ii) 
Motions adjourned without discussion at a previous meeting on the request of  
             
the proposer 
 
(iii) Notices of Motion shall appear on the agenda, in the order of their receipt 
0) Notices of motion – Non-Fingal County Council Statutory Functions –  
Motions relating to matters that are not within the direct control and statutory 
functions of Fingal County Council will be listed on the Agenda in the following order; 
(i) Business not reached at previous meeting. 
(ii) Motions adjourned without discussion at a previous meeting on the request of the 
proposer. 
(iii) 
Notices of Motion shall appear on the agenda, in the order of their receipt. 
p) Other business as set forth in the agenda paper. 
 
 
45 b) 
The order of business for the Organisation, Procedures and Finance Committee should 
include the following items: 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
2. Questions 
3. Matters of Organisation and Procedure 
4. Finance Matters to include:                                                                                                                        
 (i) Monthly report on both Income and Expenditure on both Revenue and  
      Capital Account 
  (ii) Report on all Strategic Financial matters facing the Council 
5. Motions         
The rules for the submission of business, questions and motions that will apply to this 
Committee will be as applied to Full Council meetings of Standing Order No. 50 and No. 66.   
                                                                                                                                             
It shall be a function of the Organisation, Procedure and Finance Committee to fix 
periodically: 
a) The dates and times of meetings of the Council and its Committees.                                                                       
b) Meetings of the OP&F shall be held without admission of the press or public.                                                       
c) Minutes of the OP&F shall not be placed on the Council agenda, but a report of the 
Chairperson shall be placed on the agenda outlining business.                                                                                     
d) Any decision of the OP&F which requires confirmation by resolution shall be placed on the 
Council agenda by the Chief Executive as a headed item. 
 
46. 
All items appearing on Council agendas, and which require to be proposed and seconded, 
other than those items specifically entered by Members, shall be taken to be proposed and 
seconded by the Mayor and Deputy Mayor unless there is a particular reason why the item 
should not be proposed and/or seconded by the Mayor and/or Deputy Mayor. 
 
 
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES 
 
47.  
Minutes of every meeting shall be drawn up in accordance with paragraph 14 of Schedule 10 
of the Local Government Act 2001.  
The Minutes shall include:  
a) The date, place and time of the Meeting  
b) The names of the Members present at the Meeting  
c) The names of the Senior Employees of the Local Authority present 
d) Reference to any report submitted to the Members at the Meeting  

12 
 
e) Where there is a roll call vote, the number and names of Members voting for and 
against the Motion and of those abstaining  
f) Particulars of all Resolutions passed at the Meeting  
g) Such other matters considered appropriate. 
The Minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach at such meeting, 
and shall be kept by the Council, and no Minutes shall be submitted for confirmation unless 
a copy thereof shall have been previously, and at least one day before the meeting, 
transmitted to every Member of the Council/Committee after which such Minutes shall be 
taken as read when the question that they be confirmed shall be put from the Chair, unless 
a Member requests that any part be read in order to determine whether it is an accurate 
record, provided that no entry shall be made in the minutes of any protest or expression of 
dissent, save in the form of a Motion or amendment.  
 
48.  
Any discussion of the Minutes except as to their accuracy is out of order, and the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall rule accordingly.  Questions are only permissible on matters 
arising out of the Minutes, and for information only and not for discussion. 
 
 
QUESTIONS 
 
49. 
Written questions by Members, which are received in advance, are permitted to be put to the 
Chief Executive relating to the business of the Council or the Executive functions of the Chief 
Executive. 
 
50. 
Each Councillor may submit one question for the Council meeting, and one additional 
question shall be allowable in lieu of a Motion. Each Councillor may submit seven 
questions for an Area Committee meeting and two questions shall be allowable in lieu of 
two Motions, providing that there is no Motion which was not reached at the previous 
meeting or an adjourned Motion which will take precedence (reference Standing Order 
No. 66 and No. 67)  
 
51. 
Before being formally put and answered, questions must be approved by the meeting on 
Motion without debate. Questions shall be framed in such a way as to elicit information or 
a report on a matter. 
 
52. 
Questions shall not involve argument, nor contain any matters, except such as are strictly 
necessary to explain such questions. Questions must relate to a specific subject or aspect of 
a service only and if applicable to a locality, must be confined to a single instance or 
application and may not be omnibus.  
 
53.  
Matters referred to in Questions will not be discussed or debated and any further 
information or clarification may be followed up outside of the meeting’s agenda either 
directly with the relevant Department or through the Corporate Services Department who 
will follow up with the relevant Department. Supplementary questions are not allowed. A 
question which has been fully answered may not be renewed. 
 
54.  
Where the subject matter relates to a Local Area and not to Policy issues, questions, and 
Motions in connection with these issues should be submitted only to the Area Committees.   
 
55. 
Any questions which in the opinion of the Meetings Administrator are unreasonable, unsuitable 
in form, frivolous, or derogatory to the dignity of the Council may be disallowed. 

13 
 
 
56. 
With the consent of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach, urgent and important questions may be put 
without notice in exceptional circumstances, if the information required is readily available. 
 
57. 
The latest day for submission of questions for inclusion on agenda for meetings of the Council 
or any one of its Committees shall be nine clear working days before the date of the meeting. 
Only those questions which are received before midnight on that day will appear on that 
agenda. 
 
 
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 
58. 
A copy of every report of the Corporate Policy Group or of a Committee to be submitted to 
the Council shall, before the submission thereof, be transmitted to every Member of the 
Council at least three days before the Council meeting, save in cases of urgency when the 
reading of the report to the Council shall suffice. 
 
59. 
Where several items are dealt with in a Report it shall be in order, to submit by reading any 
item or items requiring urgent consideration. 
 
60. 
A Report may without notice: 
 
 
(a) 
Be adopted 
 
(b)   
Be postponed for consideration  
(c) 
Be referred back to the Committee from which emanated for re-consideration and 
further report with or without instructions 
 
(d) 
Be amended. 
 
61. 
Every report of a Committee of the Council shall be signed by the Cathaoirleach of the 
Committee or by the Councillor in the Chair when the report was adopted.  A motion to 
adopt a report of a Committee or to sanction any proceeding or recommendation of a 
Committee shall be proposed by the Cathaoirleach of that Committee or, in their absence, 
by one of its Members.  A report recommending or involving expenditure shall not be 
considered by the Council unless it contains or is accompanied by a statement setting out 
the expenditure which would be involved by the adoption of the report. 
 
 
MANAGEMENT REPORTS / CHIEF EXECUTIVE REPORT 
 
62.       (a) 
Under the item Chief Executive’s report members shall be allowed ninety seconds 
to make a contribution. Within their contribution Members shall only be allowed 
to refer to matters of policy and/or countywide relevance. No area specific matter 
shall be allowed to be raised by Members during their contribution. 
 
(b) 
The Management Report (Chief Executive Report) shall be circulated 3 days prior 
to the ordinary meeting of the Council. 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
BUSINESS OF THE MAYOR/CATHAOIRLEACH 
 
63. 
At each monthly meeting of the County Council, the Mayor may submit, two Motions in 
addition to their right, as a Member to submit one question and one Motion in the ordinary 
way. The additional Motions will be listed under Mayor’s Business on the agenda and the 
question and Motion received in the ordinary way will be listed by date and time submitted. 
 
64. 
At each meeting of the Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Area Committee, Blanchardstown- 
Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee and the Howth/Malahide Area Committee, 
the Cathaoirleach may submit one Motion in addition to their right, as a Member to submit 
two Motions and seven questions in the ordinary way. The additional Motion will be listed 
under Cathaoirleach Business on the agenda and the questions and Motions received in the 
ordinary way will be listed by date and time submitted. 
 
 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS 
 
65. 
The agenda paper for a Council meeting shall contain Notice of Motions where Notice is 
submitted in advance of the Meeting and in accordance with these Standing Orders. 
 
66. 
The Agenda paper for a Council meeting shall contain no more than one notice of Motion 
from any one Councillor, including an adjourned Motion. 
 
67. 
The Agenda paper for an Area Committee meeting shall not contain more than two Motions 
for any one Councillor, including an adjourned Motion. 
 
68. 
Each Member of the Council may submit an original Motion relevant to the business of the 
Council on giving notice through the Meetings Management System, to the Meetings 
Administrator.  The latest date for submission of Motions for inclusion on agenda for 
meetings of the Council, or any one of its Committees, shall be nine clear working days before 
the day of the meeting, except for County Development Plan meetings where, because of the 
nature and volume of the Motions, additional time may be required to allow for consideration 
by the Chief Executive. Only those notices of Motion which are received before midnight of 
that day will appear on the agenda paper. 
 
69. 
A notice of Motion recommending or involving expenditure shall not be considered by the 
Council unless the Council has before it at the same time a report from the proper officer 
setting out the estimated expenditure which would be involved by the adoption of the 
Motion. 
 
70. 
Each Council Member and each representative on the Strategic Policy Committees will be 
confined to submitting one Motion only for each Strategic Policy Committee meeting 
agenda. The submission of questions for such agendas will not be permitted. 
 
71. 
Every notice of Motion (and any notice of amendment thereto) shall be relevant to some 
question which affects, or may affect, the services of the Council, the administration of the 
County or the interests of the people of the County.  A Notice of Motion shall be written in 
a concise and transparent form to set out a clear proposal for action or express an 
opinion to be put before a Committee for approval that addresses a single issue.   
Motions should not be omnibus in nature, relate to a particular subject only and shall not 
apply to a variety of services affecting a single area. A Notice of Motion containing more 

15 
 
than one issue shall be divided by the Meetings Administrator in consultation with the 
Member who submitted the Motion, or if the Member cannot be contacted, in 
consultation with the Mayor/Cathaoirleach and each matter listed shall count as a 
separate Motion. 
 
72. 
If any Notice of Motion of which notice has been duly given relates to a matter normally 
dealt with by a Committee or comes within the terms of reference of any Area Committee 
or Committees, it shall be referred to such Area Committee or Committees as the meetings 
administrator may determine. Any dispute on such reference shall be determined by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach. 
 
73. 
Any notice, which is seriously technically out of order, or contains unbecoming 
expressions, may be excluded from the agenda by order of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach. 
The Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall reference the Standing Order under which the Motion is 
deemed out of order. 
 
 
MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE 
 
74. 
The following Motions may be made without notice at a meeting: 
 
 
a) 
On matters expressly required by Statute to be done at the meeting 
 
b) 
On matters arising directly out of a Report presented at the meeting. The Motion 
must be directly relevant to a substantive issue addressed within the report. 
Members should reference the section and page number of the report their 
Motion relates to  
 
c) 
For, or on, the appointment of a Committee to which business specified is to be 
referred 
 
d) 
For the resolution of the Council into a Committee of the whole Council 
 
e) 
For a variation of the order of business 
 
f) 
For the adjournment of the meeting 
 
g) 
For the suspension of a Standing Order or of Standing Orders in respect of any 
specified rule or rules 
 
h) 
For the appointment of a Cathaoirleach of the day, the Cathaoirleach/Mayor 
and/Deputy Mayor being absent.  
 
i) 
Motion to reconsider (Standing Order No. 81) 
 
j) 
Emergency Motions (Standing Order No. 79) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
MOTIONS 
 
75. 
The proposer of a Motion or an amendment not printed on the agenda paper shall, before 
moving same, deliver a copy in writing to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach.  For a Member attending 
a meeting remotely the Motion or amendment not printed on the agenda paper shall be 
submitted from the Member’s Council email address to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach, Corporate 
Services and the Meetings Administrator. 
 
76. 
A Motion may be withdrawn with the permission of the meeting. 
 

16 
 
77. 
Discussion on any Motion is restricted to the subject of the Motion put to the Council. 
Members may not, under cover of any Motions authorised by these Orders, discuss any other 
subject. 
 
78. 
If a Member is not present at a meeting when their Motion is reached on the agenda paper, 
the Member may move the Motion, when duly seconded, without debate before the end of 
the meeting when they are present at the meeting. The Chief Executive’s report is accepted 
in such cases and is subject to the agreement of the Members. 
 
 
EMERGENCY MOTION 
 
79. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these Standing Orders a Motion may be proposed 
without notice for the purpose of dealing with urgent or emergency business related to a 
function of the Local Authority and where due to its seriousness and the imminence of the 
matter gives rise to an unexpected, urgent and/or potentially dangerous situation 
requiring immediate action of Council within its statutory functions.  
 
Emergency Motions must be submitted to Mayor/Cathaoirleach, Corporate Services and 
the Meeting Administrator by:                                                                                                                         
(i) 10am on the morning of the Full Council Meeting                                                                         
(ii) 4pm on the working day prior to the Area Committee Meeting,                                                                       
unless related to an issue that has arisen after these times on the day in question. 
In exceptional circumstances the Mayor/Cathaoirleach may consider Emergency Motions 
received outside of these timelines. 
 
   
Any such Motion must set out the clear reasons why the Motion cannot be dealt with by 
way of Motion to an ordinary meeting of the Council or a Committee. If the Emergency 
Motion is deemed Out of Order, it should not be read into the record of the meeting.   
Any such proposed Motion requires the support of two-thirds of the Members present 
subject to the number voting in favour of the Motion being not less than half of the total 
number of Members of the Authority or Committee. The Motion shall not be considered 
until 2 ¾ hours after the commencement of business, or at the conclusion of the 
business, whichever is the earlier. 
 
 
SIMILAR OR RESCINDING MOTIONS 
 
80. 
When any Motion or Resolution has been disposed of by the Council, it shall not be for any 
Councillor to propose a similar or rescinding Motion within a period of six months without 
the consent of not less than three-fourths of the Councillors of the Council. 
 
 
MOTION TO RECONSIDER 
 
81. 
A Member may move a Motion to reconsider a Motion of which they were the proposer and 
where the Chief Executive’s report was accepted by the proposer and where no vote has 
taken place. Such a Motion, if seconded, may only be considered where a clear 
misunderstanding of the content of the Chief Executive’s report is explained by the Member. 
The consent of three quarters of the members of the whole Council, will be required for a 

17 
 
Motion to be reconsidered. Such a Motion may only be proposed during the meeting at which 
the original Motion was considered. 
 
 
AMENDMENTS TO MOTIONS 
 
82. 
An Amendment may: 
 
 
a) 
Omit certain words 
 
b) 
Omit certain words and insert or add others 
 
c) 
Insert certain words 
 
d) 
Add certain words. 
 
83. 
An amendment shall not involve such substantial alteration of the Motion as to make it a new 
Motion. 
 
84. 
An amendment shall not commit the meeting to anything more onerous than the original 
Motion. 
 
85. 
An amendment must be formally moved and seconded before any discussion or vote can be 
taken. 
 
86. 
At a physical meeting an amendment must be in writing clearly stating the proposed 
alteration and signed by the proposer and handed to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach. If the 
amendment is submitted by a Member attending a meeting by virtual means it shall be 
submitted from the Member’s Council email address to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach, Corporate 
Services and the Meetings Administrator. 
 
87.  
An amendment shall not be moved after the original Motion is put to the Council 
 
88. 
The proposer of an amendment may be permitted by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach to reply. 
 
89. 
If there is an equality of votes and the Mayor/Cathaoirleach does not exercise their casting 
vote the Amendment is deemed not carried.  
 
90. 
When a Motion and an amendment remain before the Chair, the amendment shall be first 
put, and shall be disposed of before any other amendments can be moved.  When an 
amendment is agreed, the original Motion shall disappear and the amended Motion shall 
become the Motion under consideration, upon which a new Amendment may be moved.  
When an amendment is lost, another amendment to the original Motion may be proposed, 
but only one amendment shall be at any one time before the Chair.  Notice of any number of 
amendments may, however, be given. 
 
91. 
A Member may propose an amendment to any amendment being considered to a Motion 
before the Council. Any amendment proposed to an amendment under consideration is 
subject to Standing Order No. 82 to 90.  
 
 
In such cases, the question of making an amendment to the amendment shall be 
considered and put first. When affirmed, the amendment stands amended and is then 
considered as the proposed amendment. When lost, the first proposed amendment is 
considered. 

18 
 
RULES OF DEBATE 
 
92. 
All Members are bound to act in accordance with the Ethics Framework and Code of Conduct 
for Local Authority Members, to co-operate with the orderly conduct of meetings, the 
direction of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach and in a manner that is respectful of colleagues. 
 
93. 
Members must bear in mind that discussions at Council Meetings are not privileged. No 
Member may make false statements, impute improper motives, or use offensive or 
unbecoming words in reference to any Member of the Council, Employee of the Council, 
or any other person. Any Member having made such statements or used such 
objectionable words, and not explaining or retracting the same, or offering apologies for 
the use thereof when requested by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach to do so, shall be called upon 
by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach to withdraw from the meeting. 
 
94. 
A Member while speaking shall address themselves to the Mayor/Cathaoirleach.  Any 
Member participating in a meeting remotely must, when they are speaking, be able to be 
heard and seen, by all other Members in attendance, and the remote participant must, in 
turn, be able to hear and see, those other Members participating. 
 
95. 
A Member speaking is not to be interrupted except on a point of order, but they shall give 
way to a Member desiring to make a personal explanation with the consent of the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach. A Member who speaks shall confine their speech strictly to the 
matter under discussion. A ruling of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach on a point of order, or on the 
admissibility of a personal explanation, shall be final and shall not be open to discussion. 
 
96. 
The proposer of a Motion shall be allowed to speak to the Motion for not more than three 
minutes and for a further three minutes in reply to the debate, the speech of any other 
contributor shall not exceed two minutes. 
 
97. 
On matters of exceptional importance, the Mayor/Cathaoirleach may consent to the 
continuation of a speech for an additional three minutes. Any further extension shall 
require the special consent of the meeting and shall be for a definite period. 
 
98. 
Members of the Council shall address and speak of each other in the Council by the respective 
titles of “Mayor”, “Cathaoirleach" or "Councillor". 
 
99.  
The Mayor/Cathaoirleach may allow a Member to speak a second time, but only after every 
Member who desires to do so shall have spoken once.  
 
 
100. 
The Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall call a Member to order for irrelevance, repetition, 
unbecoming language, imputations of motives, reflections of a personal character upon 
another Member or employee, or any breach of order, and may direct such Member, if 
speaking, to discontinue their speech. 
 
101. 
In the event of a grave disorder at the meeting, or of persistent disregard to the authority 
of the Chair, the Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall protect the meeting in the conduct of its 
business by directing the Member or Members causing such disorder, or disregarding 
such authority, to retire for any period up to and including the remainder of the meeting 
or for a shorter period. 
 

19 
 
102. 
When the Mayor/Cathaoirleach so directs a Member to retire, and the Member does not 
retire immediately, the Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall give directions for the removal of the 
Member and such other directions as are necessary for restoring order to the proceedings. 
 
103. 
If the Mayor/Cathaoirleach considers that the meeting, owing to disorder, cannot continue, 
they shall have power to adjourn the meeting for a short interval. 
 
 
DETERMINATION/VOTING 
 
104. 
Subject to any statutory provision requiring the recording of the names of Members voting 
for or against a motion, voting may be: 
 
 
(a) 
By voice when it is obvious that the meeting is practically unanimous, and no Member 
dissenting. 
(b) 
By show of hands. If any objections as to the correctness of the results are made a 
poll may be demanded  
(c) 
By a division, i.e., a regular count of the Members for or against the motion. 
 
105. 
Every matter at a meeting of the Council shall be determined by a majority of the votes of the 
Members of the Council voting on the matter, unless otherwise stated by Statute or included 
in Standing Orders, and, in the case of an equal division of votes, the Mayor/Cathaoirleach of 
the meeting shall have a second or casting vote.  
 
 
106. 
When voting on a Motion is by a roll-call division, there shall be an interval of three minutes 
between the decision to take the vote and the actual vote itself should any Member so 
request.  The Mayor/Cathaoirleach shall determine when this interval has elapsed. 
 
107. 
No Motion or amendment shall be put to the Council unless it has been duly proposed and 
seconded.  A Motion may be proposed either by the Member in whose name it stands, or in 
their absence, by any Member authorised by them to propose it on their behalf.  If a 
Councillor is not present to propose their Motion at a full Council meeting, the Motion shall 
retain its position on the schedule of Motions for the next full Council meeting unless 
removed by the Councillor concerned.  
 
108. 
Verbal/Written reports to Motions will be presented as such by the Chief Executive only where 
a Motion has been proposed and seconded. Once the Motion is put to the Council, reports 
will be made available to Members for the purpose of discussion at the meeting and are only 
published to the public record where Members have concluded consideration, debate and 
decided/voted on the Motion in question. 
 
109. 
When the Mayor/Cathaoirleach has not formally declared the result of a vote or is in doubt 
as to whether their declaration is right or wrong, they are entitled to take a second vote 
on the matter especially if they consider that through some misunderstanding the first 
vote did not properly represent the sense of the meeting. 
 
110. 
The Mayor/Cathaoirleach cannot give their first vote after they have ascertained the number 
of votes for or against a Motion.  They can only then give their casting vote. 
 

20 
 
 
COMMITTEES 
 
111. 
The Council and every Committee are authorised to furnish to the Press reports of its 
proceedings. 
 
112. 
The Chief Executive shall summon a meeting of any standing or special Committee on the 
request of its Mayor/Cathaoirleach, or any three of its Councillors or whenever they shall 
deem it necessary that such Committee shall meet. 
 
113. 
In the event of the Council deciding to empower any special Committee to do any act without 
further reference to the Council, the resolution of appointment shall be in conformity with 
Section 51 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
114. 
Minutes shall be kept of the proceedings of every Committee by such Officer of the Council 
assigned to attend the Committee.  Such minutes shall give the names of each Member 
present. 
 
115. 
All questions in Committee shall be determined by a majority of such Members of the 
Committee as vote and in case of an equal division of votes the Cathaoirleach shall have a 
casting vote in addition to their vote as a Member of the Committee. 
 
116. 
Committees may appoint Sub-Committees of their number for facilitating the transaction of 
business, who shall report to the Committee, but such Sub-Committees shall not have power 
to transact any business without express authority from the Committee. 
 
117. 
Each Member of a Committee is to be notified of every meeting of that Committee. 
 
118. 
The Council may from time to time appoint any Special Committee for specific purpose, and 
may, set out terms of reference for this Committee. 
 
119. 
The Council may, at any time, resolve itself into a Committee of the whole Council for the 
transaction of business, to be specified in the resolution.  The quorum of a Committee of the 
whole Council shall be eleven.  
 
120. 
Subject to the provisions of Standing Order No.14, meetings of any standing Committee 
numbered c, d, e, f, g, h, I, j, k, l shall  be open to the public or media unless otherwise agreed 
by the committee .  
 
121. 
A meeting of the Council shall take precedence over a meeting of any Committee. 
 
122. 
Subject to the provisions of Standing Order No. 123, recommendations of the standing 
Committees numbered a) to l) inclusive, as set out in Standing Order No. 14, on reserved 
functions and policy matters shall come before the Council for consideration by way of report, 
otherwise, the proceedings of each Committee shall come before the Committee for 
confirmation and re-affirmation at its next meeting. 
 
123. 
Recommendations of the Strategic Policy Committees, numbered c) to i) in Standing Order 
No. 14, shall come before the Corporate Policy Group in the first instance before being 
considered by the Council.  
 

21 
 
124.  
Members of a Strategic Policy Committee shall not be entitled to nominate a substitute 
to attend Strategic Policy Committee meetings in their place. In the event of a member 
failing to attend 3 consecutive ordinary meetings of the Committee in any year, except in 
case of illness, maternity leave or for some reason approved by the Council, the Council 
and/or nominating sector shall be asked to review the matter. Council Members of 
another Strategic Policy Committee may attend meetings with the permission of the 
Chairperson and may speak with the permission of the Chairperson but are not entitled 
to vote.  
  
125. 
Vacancies in Committees shall be filled by the Council at any ensuing meeting of the Council. 
 
126. 
Members of Standing Committees numbered j), k) and l), in Standing Order No. 14 may 
submit two Motions and seven questions for each meeting of the Committee subject to the 
provision that an additional question shall be allowable in lieu of a Motion, providing that 
there is no Motion which was not reached at the previous meeting or an adjourned Motion 
which will take precedence (reference Standing Order No. 50 and No .67)  
  
127. 
Where the Council otherwise directs, it shall be a function of the Organisation, Procedures 
and Finance Committee to fix periodically the dates and times of meetings of the Council and 
its Committees. 
 
128. 
Site visits within the County shall be approved by the County Council, or by the Organisation, 
Procedures and Finance Committee, as the case may be. 
 
 
MAKING OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
 
129. In any consideration of the making of the Development Plan, all amendments suggested by the 
Chief Executive, or the Members shall be specifically listed on the agenda for the relevant 
meeting as headed items or Motions as appropriate and in such way as clearly to identify the 
area or purpose involved.  
 
 
VARIATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
 
                130.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 132, or of any other Standing Order 
relating to the submission of Motions, at a meeting held to consider submissions/observations 
and the report of the Chief Executive made under Section 12(9) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, as amended, or to make the proposed plan in accordance with the 
provision of Section 12(10) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, Motions 
to make such proposed plan with or without amendments (including Motions for a specific 
amendment or amendments) as provided for in the aforesaid Section 12(10), as amended, may 
be made without notice at such meeting.  
 
131. Notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 69 and No. 74(b) in any consideration 
of a Variation to the County Development Plan following the public consultation procedures 
as set out in Section 13 the Planning and Development Act 2000, as amended, all 
modifications proposed by the Members shall be by way of Motion submitted seven clear 
working days before the day of the meeting and in such a way as to clearly identify the area 
or purpose involved. Once consideration of a Variation has commenced, no further Motions 
can be submitted or proposed.  

22 
 
 
LOCAL AREA PLANS 
 
132.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 69 and No. 74(b) in any consideration 
of a Local Area Plan following the public consultation procedures as set out in the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, as amended, all amendments suggested by the Members shall be by 
way of Motion, submitted seven clear working days before the day of the meeting and in such 
way as to clearly identify the area or purpose involved.  Once consideration of a Local Area Plan 
has commenced no further Motions can be submitted or proposed.  
 
 
ACCEPTANCE OF OFFICE, RESIGNATION, VACANCIES, ETC. 
 
133. 
 A Councillor may, at any time, in writing, signed by them, and delivered to the Chief Executive 
of the Council, resign their membership of the Council. 
 
134. 
If a Councillor is absent from meetings of the Council for more than twelve months, except in 
case of illness, maternity leave or for some reason approved of by the Council, the Councillor 
will be deemed to have resigned. 
 
135. 
A Member of any Committee who is absent from all meetings of the Committee in any twelve 
months shall, except in case of illness, maternity leave or for some reason approved by the 
Council, be disqualified and be ineligible for re-election.  
 
136. 
A casual vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 
2001. 
 
137.  
Where a casual vacancy is caused by the resignation of a non-party Member, the vacancy 
shall, be filled by a person nominated by the Member. In the case of a casual vacancy being 
caused by the death of a non-party Member the vacancy shall be filled by a nominee of the 
family of the Member and for the purposes of this standing order “member of the family” 
means a brother, sister, parent and spouse of the Member or a child of the Member.  
 
 
MAKING OF APPOINTMENTS 
 
138. 
Subject to observance of any statutory requirements in relation to the making of 
appointments, the following procedure shall apply: 
 
a) 
If the number of nominees, duly proposed and seconded, exceeds the number of 
appointments to be made, then each Councillor will be entitled to vote by ballot for 
not more than the number of appointments to be made. 
b) 
Nominees securing the greatest number of votes shall then be declared to be 
appointed in order until the number of vacancies has been filled. In the event of a tie 
between two or more nominees for one or more remaining vacancies, there shall be 
a further ballot or ballots as necessary, on the basis set out in sub-paragraph (a) 
above, between the tied nominees for the vacancy or vacancies have been filled. 
c) 
If following a ballot or a number of ballots there remains two or more tied 
candidates for one or more vacancies, the remaining vacancy or vacancies shall be 
filled successively by a ballot between the remaining tied candidates, each Councillor 
having a single vote, and in the event of a further tie, the Mayor shall have a casting 

23 
 
vote after each such ballot. Should the Mayor following such ballot not exercise their 
casting vote, the person to be appointed shall be determined by lot. 
d) 
If the number of nominees duly proposed and seconded is equal to or less than the 
number of appointments to be made, the nominees shall be declared to be 
appointed. 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES AT CONGRESS, ETC. 
 
139. 
Councillors and representatives attending on behalf of the Council at meetings of 
Associations, Conferences, or Congresses shall report to the Council upon any matter 
discussed at such meetings, which, in their opinion, is of interest to the Council. 
 
 
DEPUTATIONS 
 
140. 
The Council may set aside days on which Deputations shall be received. 
 
141. 
Any person/persons wishing to address the Council, must apply in writing to the Deputations 
Administrator, at least seven clear days before the day for Deputations, setting out the 
matters they wish to discuss.  No Deputation shall exceed five persons in number and the 
maximum duration of discussion between a Deputation and the Council Members and 
officials shall be forty minutes.   A person/persons may only meet with the Council once within 
any six-month period unless the Council specifically agrees to same. 
 
 
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATIONS 
 
142.  
Following the signing of a Presidential Election Order by the Minister, a Special Meeting 
of the Council may be held between four and fourteen days following the signing of the 
Order. 
 
143.  
A person seeking the Council’s nomination is required, in the first instance, to secure the 
sponsorship of four Elected Members of the Council before that applicant is allowed 
address the County Council. 
 
144. 
Sponsored applicants may be allowed a period of up to fifteen minutes each to make a 
presentation to the Council. 
 
145. 
Only those applicants who have addressed the Members can be nominated by the 
Council. 
 
146. 
At the conclusion of the presentation(s) and any Questions and Answers, the Mayor may 
accept proposals for the nominations of candidates from the Members. 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
COMMON SEAL 
 
147. 
The Common Seal of the Council shall be kept securely by the Council. The Seal shall only be 
affixed to any document either by resolution of the Council or a signed order of the Chief 
Executive.  Whenever the Seal is affixed the Mayor or an employee of the Authority 
nominated in writing for that purpose by the Chief Executive, following consultation with the 
Mayor, shall be present and shall testify the fact by their signature to an entry in the Seal Book 
specifying the document or documents sealed. 
 
148. 
The Common Seal may be affixed by the Mayor to any documents going abroad which do not 
in any way relate to the Council, at any time, without resolution of the Council.  
 
 
VISITORS 
 
149. 
Attendance of the public at meetings shall be in accordance with Section 45 of the Local 
Government Act 2001.  Visitors may be present at meetings of the Council in the visitor’s area, 
unless when the Council, by resolution, otherwise determines and they may report and 
publish the proceedings of the Council. Visitors may also be present at all meetings of the 
standing Committees numbered c), d), e), f), g), h), i), j), k) and l) of Standing Order No.14. 
 
150. 
Visitors shall only be admitted to any meeting of the Council or Standing Committee after 
they have been signed in by a Councillor. A Councillor may only sign in one visitor to any 
meeting if the visitor’s area has available capacity.  When, upon the expiration of a quarter of 
an hour after the time for which any meeting is convened, accommodation for visitors is not 
fully occupied, further visitors, not exceeding the number for which accommodation is 
available, may be admitted at the direction of the Meetings Administrator. 
 
151. 
Visitors and Media are to maintain silence and observe any directions given by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach or any officer in attendance.  
(i) All mobile phones during Council or Committee meetings should be turned off/on 
silent for the duration of the meeting.                                                                                                                         
(ii) No cameras of any kind or sound recording or communication equipment may be 
used by visitors at meeting.              
(iii) All Reports/Replies on an Agenda are confidential until they are reached at a meeting. 
(iv) Social Media sharing of items of business prior to it being reached at a meeting is 
prohibited.                                                                           
Visitors are the responsibility at all times of the Councillor who has signed them in.  Disorderly 
persons may be removed by order of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach. 
 
152. 
In the event of a disorderly person refusing to leave the public gallery, the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach may invoke the sanction provided for in Standing Order No. 102 and 
No. 103, against the Member who has signed the visitor in.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
GRANTING OF CIVIC HONOURS 
 
153. 
Nominations for a person or persons to be granted a civic honour/reception will be made by 
the Mayor to the Council, and the decision to confer a civic honour/reception on any person 
or persons will be made by resolution of the Council.      
 
 
MOBILE PHONES / SOCIAL MEDIA 
 
154. 
All mobile phones during Council or Committee meetings should be turned off/on silent 
for the duration of the meeting. Failure to comply with this order will result in a fine of €50 
for every time a mobile phone rings.                                                                                                                           
 
(i) 
No cameras of any kind, sound recording, or communication equipment may be 
used at meetings, except for the purpose of the Council webcast. 
(ii) 
All Report/Replies on an Agenda are confidential until they are reached at a 
meeting. 
(iii) 
Social Media sharing of items of business prior to it being reached at a meeting is 
prohibited. 
 
MEDIA  
 
155. 
Attendance of media personnel at meetings shall be in accordance with Section 45 of the 
Local Government Act 2001.  Only Accredited Media are allowed access to meetings of 
the Council and must operate in designate areas of the Council Chamber or meeting 
room. The numbers and types of media personnel to be admitted to a meeting will be 
agreed in advance of the meeting by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach.  
 
Accredited Media will be facilitated in person at the following meetings of the Council a), 
b), c) and d) of Standing Order No. 13. Accredited Media may also be present at meetings 
of standing Committees numbered c), d), e), f), g), h), i), j), k), and l) of Standing Order No. 
14. Media must apply by email to press@fingal.ie for accreditation, (subject to Standing 
Order No. 120). 
 
Media must maintain silence and observe any directions given by the Mayor/Cathaoirleach 
or any officer in attendance and comply with rulings of mobile phone and social media of 
Standing Order No. 151 and No. 154. 
 
 
REMOTE/HYBRID MEETINGS 
 
156. 
a) All Standing Orders in place are applicable to Remote/Hybrid meetings. 
b) Members should notify their Meetings Administrator in advance if they intend   to 
attend the meeting remotely.  
c) The Mayor/Cathaoirleach of the meeting should attend in person, if unable to do so in 
the first instance, the Deputy Mayor chairs the meeting and in their absence, the Mayor 
nominates another member who is attending the meeting in person as the Chair 
(reference Standing Order 37). 
d) Members should allow sufficient time to establish a connection prior to the 
commencement of the start of the meeting to allow themselves to test the connection.  
e) Members should keep their cameras on for the duration of the meeting and ensure 

26 
 
that no confidential papers are seen on video feed or that there is no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be either hearing or seeing consideration of such items, 
and/or recording the proceedings. 
f) Members must mute their microphone unless they are recognised by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach and invited to speak.  
g) Members are advised to use an appropriate headset. 
h) Members who wish to speak should use the notification process as directed by the 
Mayor/Cathaoirleach and speak when invited.  
i) The rules of debate as set out in Standing Orders 92 to 103 will apply.  
j) The meetings platform chat facility must not be used for private conversations between 
Councillors.  
k) When referring to a specific report, page or slide, Members should mention the report, 
page, or slide so that all Members have a clear understanding of what is being discussed.  
 
 
INTERPRETATION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
157. 
A ruling of the Mayor/Cathaoirleach on any question or their interpretation of the Standing 
Orders shall be final.   Should any question, doubt or dispute arise as to the area or functions 
or functioning of a Committee or as to the application of standing orders to a Committee, the 
matter shall be determined by the Mayor of the Council whose decision shall be final. 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
158. 
Any standing order or Standing Orders may, at any time by consent of at least two thirds 
of the Members present at the meeting of the Council or standing Committee, such 
meeting consisting of not less than one-half of the Members of the whole Council or 
standing Committee then present, be suspended, on a Motion duly made, for the 
purpose of any specific business then before the Council or Standing Committee, and 
defined in the suspensory Motion, save that no such Motion may be made until 2 ¾  
hours after the commencement of business, or at the conclusion of the business, 
whichever is the earlier.  
 
Subject to the Mayor’s consent the decision whether or not to suspend standing orders 
should go to a vote without debate.   
 
 
MATTERS NOT COVERED BY STANDING ORDERS 
 
159. 
The Mayor shall have power to deal with any matter not covered by Standing Orders.    
 
 
AMENDMENT OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
160. 
These Standing Orders may only be amended or repealed by Motion of the Council and 
agreed by at least one half of the total membership of the Council. 
 
 
DURATION OF STANDING ORDERS 
 
161. 
The foregoing Standing Orders shall continue in force until altered, amended, or repealed. 

27 
 
 
