December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
1 of 41 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I TEACH CILL ÁIRNE CILL ÁIRNE AR AN LUAN , 11 
NOLLAG, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
KILLARNEY HOUSE, KILLARNEY ON MONDAY, 11TH DECEMBER, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
T. Barry 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen          
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
 
              
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       S. Fitzgerald  
              
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
 
               
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
                 
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
               
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney  
              
N. Moriarty 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea   
              
L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan   
 
     
G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
 
R. Beasley 
M. Kennelly 
T. O’Brien 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services                   
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED                    
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, Dir.Hsg. & Corp.S. Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations               
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer   
         
Mr. B. Looney, Head of IT 
  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support                    
Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support  Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corporate Support 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 11.40am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed all present to Killarney House and he thanked Mr. Pat 
Dawson, Regional Manager NPWS and General Manager of Killarney House for 
facilitating the meeting.  He then called on Mr. Dawson to address the meeting. 
 
Mr. Dawson welcomed members, officials and members of the Press to Killarney 
House on this historic occasion.  He paid tribute to councillors and Council officials 
for their support in securing funding to restore Killarney House to enable it to be 
opened to the public.  It cost in excess of €10m to restore the House and Gardens to 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
2 of 41 
 
their former glory.  This is a facility not just for Killarney or the county but for the 
South West of the country.  Since July 26,000 people visited Killarney House and the 
entire House will be open next year.  In conclusion Mr. Dawson acknowledged the 
generosity of the McShane Family who donated Killarney House to the State. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea commended Mr. Dawson and his staff on the opening of Killarney 
House which is of benefit to the local economy.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated it was a wonderful privilege to be welcomed to Killarney 
House for a Council meeting.  It took a lot of persistence to secure the funding to 
have Killarney House restored and he moved numerous notices of motion in support 
of it.  Eventually Minister Jimmy Deenihan made the commitment to fund the 
restoration works and this must be acknowledged. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin complimented Mr. Dawson and his staff on the redevelopment of 
Killarney House and he acknowledged the commitment by former Minister Deenihan 
to the project.  It is a huge asset to Killarney and elected members and the people of 
Killarney are very proud of it.  In conclusion Cllr. Cronin called for the development of 
a new access to Tomies Wood. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty emphasised the importance of Killarney House to Killarney.  It is 
unique to have a town in a Park and he thanked Mr. Dawson and his staff for their 
commitment and dedication to the restoration of Killarney House.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae thanked Mr. Dawson and his staff for facilitating the Council 
Meeting in Killarney House. 
 
Vote of Sympathy 
Cllr. M. O’Shea extended a vote of sympathy to the wife and family of the late Sean 
O’Sullivan, Dunloe Upper.  Sean was a former employee of Kerry County Council 
and he worked for 30years in the Water Services Department. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae extended a vote of sympathy to the Crowley Family, Gortdarrig on 
the tragic death of their daughter Denise. 
 
Dumping of Silt 
Cllr. M. O’Shea advised that silt from the dredging of Dingle Harbour is being 
dumped off Dun Sheen Head and fishermen are very concerned that it is being 
dumped too close to the Head.  Department guidelines state that silt should be 
disposed of 2km off Dun Sheen Head but locals believe it is being deposited closer.  
In the past when Dingle Harbour was dredged the silt was dumped off Kinard Bay 
and this resulted in a lot of damage to the area.   
 
17.12.11.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on the 5th 
December 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Agenda for the December Council Meeting 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the December Council Meeting. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
3 of 41 
 
 
In respect of planned Governance Training for members the Chief Executive advised 
that the Council is working with the IPA to review our governance policies and 
procedures. As part of this review refresher training for Councillors on Governance 
Framework and structures in place, will be provided.  In that context CPG 
recommended that the Governance Training for members would take place on 
Monday 29th January. 
 
CPG agreed that the December Council meeting would commence at 11.30am. 
 
Mr. Quinlan reminded CPG that a Civic Welcome would be afforded to Mayor Reichelt 
from West Springfield, Massachusetts at the December Meeting.  
 
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that the Quality of Life SPC met on the 30th November and a 
report would be presented to the December meeting. 
 
CPG noted that meetings of the other three SPCs would be held in the coming 
weeks. 
 
Review of requests for Municipal District Awards 
The CPG agreed that KDYS Volunteers and Tralee Soup Kitchen would be 
honoured at the upcoming Annual Awards Event for Tralee MD.” 
 
17.12.11.02 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“The report below has been prepared for the December 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on a 
quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community & 
Local Government. The Qtr 3 Financial report is included as an appendix to this   
report. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
LIS Scheme  
The Department of Rural and Community Development has allocated an additional 
€268,578 in funding under the LIS scheme, bringing the total grant allocation to over 
€995,000 for 2017. This allows for over 40 schemes to be completed with the 
funding received. The Department has also indicated that further funding will be 
made available in 2018. If a similar level of funding is received in 2018, the Council 
will reopen the scheme for new applications.  
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
4 of 41 
 
Meeting with T.I.I.  
The Director of Services for Operations & Infrastructure and I met with senior officials 
from Transport Infrastructure Ireland, at the end of November in relation to critical 
infrastructure in the county, including the Farranfore – Killarney Road Scheme, the 
Lewis Road / Kilcummin Road junctions and the need for investment in our national 
secondary road network, as well as the Council’s concerns with vulnerable sections 
of the road network, such as at Mountain Stage and on the Molls Gap Road. They 
have given approval to the Council to proceed with the planning and development of 
appropriate solutions for the Lewis Road / Kilcummin Road junctions. The need for a 
review of the Farranfore – Killarney Road Scheme was acknowledged.   
 
The TII have approved additional resources for the NRDO office to progress 
pavement overlay schemes on the national road network in Kerry and I hope to have 
further details of schemes to be progressed in the New Year, when the 2018 work 
programme is presented to Council. A positive indication was also received in 
relation to advancing the Macroom Ballyvourney By-Pass which is critical for the 
development of the county.   
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Excellence in Local Government Awards  
The Excellence in Local Government Awards recognise best practice in local 
government and are held annually in conjunction with the Department of Housing, 
Planning and Local Government. The MacGillycuddy Reeks Habitat and Trail Repair 
Project – A Collaborative Rural Economic Development Zone (REDZ) Initiative won 
the Category of Sustainable Environment at the Excellence in Local Government 
Awards Event which were held in November and there is a separate presentation on 
this winning project at the December Council meeting. 
 
Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy  
The Southern Regional Assembly intends to prepare a Draft Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy and associated environmental reports to support the 
implementation of the emerging National Planning Framework.   In order to stimulate 
debate and encourage participation in the process an Issues Paper has been 
prepared by the SRA. This issues paper details the matters to be considered in the 
Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy including: 
 
• Future infrastructural investment priorities. 
• The future role of our regional cities, towns and rural areas. 
• Industry, employment, training and regional economic performance. 
• Regional housing needs and settlement patterns. 
• Social, community and cultural facilities. 
 
Local authorities, state agencies, public and private agencies, interest groups and 
the public generally are invited to make written submissions at this first stage of the 
Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy process by Friday 26th January 2018 and 
Kerry County Council plans to use this opportunity to make a detailed submission to 
the SRA.   
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
5 of 41 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
A series of further one-day training programmes were delivered in Cahersiveen, 
Killarney and Tralee in the recent past. The Local Enterprise Innovation & 
Investment fund has secured investment for one Kerry Company and a further three 
companies have secured funding through KCC LEO core funding. The Kerry element 
of Ireland’s Best Young Entrepreneur competition will conclude on 7th December 
with the announcement of the winners. Kerry will host the Mid-West Regional Final 
on 16th January. The office has commenced it’s 2017 Employment survey and work 
is ongoing in this regard. Planning has commenced for the 2018 suite of 
programmes.  
 
Tourism Department 
 
Official Launch of the Destination Brand for Kerry: 
The Kerry Destination Brand is due to be officially launched by Minister Brendan 
Griffin, Department of Transport, Tourism & Sport in Killarney House on Friday 8th 
December 2017.  The new Kerry Destination brand will serve to promote the county 
on a national and international level, across print, online and social media platforms.   
 
Let’s Talk Tourism National Tourism Forum: 
The Let’s Talk Tourism Forum was recently hosted in Killarney with an attendance of 
almost 200 delegates. A wide range of Tourism Topics were discussed and debated 
by expert speakers and panellists.  
 
The topics discussed included: - the Importance of Tourism to Ireland, 
Regionalisation and Seasonality, Skills and Man Power, Food Tourism, Digital 
Trends and Screen Tourism. 
 
Community Department 
 
RAPID Programme 2017 
In November, the Department of Rural and Community Development launched a 
revamped RAPID capital grant programme. The Programme is being administered 
by the Local Community Development Committees under the remit of the Local 
Authorities on behalf of the Department. The Kerry LCDC will make a 
recommendation and submit the applications it received to the Municipal District 
Elected Members for decision.   In Kerry the available fund of €64,500 has been 
targeted to support projects under the RAPID theme of -Community Safety & Anti-
Social Behaviour.   
 
2017 Pride of Place awards 
The winners of the IPB Pride of Place Awards in association with Co-operation 
Ireland were announced on the 2nd of December. The awards acknowledge the 
achievements and the invaluable work undertaken by volunteers and those involved 
in local community development. 
  
Glenbeigh in Kerry achieved the runner up position in Category One, which is for 
villages with a population of less than 300 people.  Kerry Social Farming Project also 
took the runner up spot in the Community Reaching Out Initiative Category.

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
6 of 41 
 
Financial Report 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Kerry County Council 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
1 
Major Expenditure & Income by Division with 2017 Adopted Budget 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Date as at end of Quarter 3 (September 2017) in accordance with EU / IMF return on expenditure and Income made to DOHP&LG on 24th 
November 2017 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
EXPENDITURE 
  
INCOME 
Service 
  
Total Exp. To 
date 
Budget Outturn 
Budget 
Remaining 
% 
Budget 
Spent 
to 
date 
  
Total Inc. to 
date 
Budget 
Outturn 
Not Rec'd 
% 
Rec'd 
Division
Description 
2017 
2017 
2017 
2017 
  
2017 
2017 
2017 
2017 
A 
Housing and Building 
20,280,366 
24,593,868 
4,313,502 
82%   
17,345,467 
23,968,846 
6,623,379 
72% 
B 
Road Transport & Safety 
24,066,493 
33,372,617 
9,306,124 
72%   
15,004,522 
21,346,712 
6,342,190 
70% 
C 
Water Services 
9,817,364 
14,466,687 
4,649,323 
68%   
9,455,918 
13,690,847 
4,234,929 
69% 
D  
Development Management 
9,074,543 
12,751,968 
3,677,425 
71%   
3,744,025 
4,553,412 
809,387 
82% 
E 
Environmental Services 
13,105,896 
17,801,585 
4,695,689 
74%   
2,387,351 
4,029,986 
1,642,635 
59% 
F 
Recreation and Amenity 
5,878,883 
8,126,987 
2,248,104 
72%   
564,893 
550,471 
-14,422 
103% 
G 
Agriculture, Education, Health & 
Welfare 
1,612,501 
2,633,042 
1,020,541 
61%   
1,193,097 
1,992,667 
799,570 
60% 
H 
Miscellaneous Services 
12,008,827 
17,820,833 
5,812,006 
67%   
5,054,931 
6,501,670 
1,446,739 
78% 
  
Local Government Fund/General Purpose Grant 
  
  
  
  
10,332,571 
13,776,761 
3,444,190 
75% 
  
Rates 
  
  
  
  
  
30,851,767 
41,156,215 10,304,448 
75% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
Grand Total 
95,844,873 
131,567,587 
35,722,714 
73%   
95,934,542 131,567,587 35,633,045 
73% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
7 of 41 
 
 
2.Performance of Local Authority Revenue 
Collection levels 
  
Major sources of Revenue Income - Collection levels as at 31st October 
2017 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
Total for 
Collection 
Collected 
% collected 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Commercial Rates 
 € 49,568,670  
          
€30,685,152  
          62% 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Total for Collection - Full year rate demand plus 
arrears 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Rates demands were issued on 2nd March 2017 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Housing Rent & Loans: 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Rents 
 € 11,095,973  
 €      9,911,366  
          89% 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Loans 
 €   1,131,873  
 €         852,135  
 
           75% 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Rent and loans: Total for Collection - Year to date billed plus arrears 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
3 
Recourse to Overdraft Facility 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
None 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
4 
Emergency Capital works not provided for in the 
Budget 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
None” 
 
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
8 of 41 
 
 
The Chief Executive advised that the results of the first round of the Enterprise Ireland-
led Regional Enterprise Development Fund was announced by the Minister for 
Business, Enterprise and Innovation, Heather Humphreys that morning. Nationally 7 
projects qualified for funding under Stream 1 and 2 of these are in Kerry. When 
members adopted the Budget they agreed to increase LPT to provide €600,000 to 
support the 2 Stream 1 projects of a Digital Innovation Hub in Killorglin and the 
AgriTech Centre of Excellence in Tralee.  This investment will be a major jobs and 
economic boost for the county.  Minister Humphreys has also announced financial 
support for Kerry SciTech, Sneem Digital Hub and the Dingle Creativity and Innovation 
Hub (Mol Teic) in Dingle.  This is a very positive announcement for the county and she 
was pleased that Kerry County Council supported these projects. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Mr. Kevin Cronin and students from St. Brendan’s 
College to the meeting. 
 
All members welcomed the announcement by Minister Humphreys. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell congratulated the Chief Executive on putting these projects forward 
and he commended members for agreeing to increase LPT to support the two Stream 
1 projects.  Hopefully in time it will result in more jobs for the county which will provide 
good employment opportunities for graduates.  He also welcomed the funding for LIS 
announced by Minister Ring and he asked how many roads remain on the list and will 
new applications be invited in 2018. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton advised that the decision to support the increase in LPT was the most 
difficult she had to make.  However, if this funding opportunity was missed it would 
have been a big mistake as the county needs additional jobs.  Cllr. Thornton requested 
that members would be given regular updates on these projects.  She asked if roads 
in North Kerry were discussed with the TII and she expressed concern that roads in 
North Kerry were not getting the priority they need.   
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the approval given by the TII to proceed with the planning 
and development of appropriate solutions for the Lewis Road junction.  He asked if the 
TII have agreed a date for a meeting with the members from the Killarney MD.  Funding 
for LIS was discontinued for 7 or 8 years and as a result many rural roads are in a 
dreadful condition.  Cllr. Cronin welcomed the recent announcement of funding for LIS 
and he asked how many roads remain on the list and when will new applications be 
invited. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated the announcement that morning by Minister Humphries was 
significant and the decision taken by members to raise funding through an increase in 
LPT to support these projects was critical.  The two companies involved in the Stream 
1 projects are local and are major economic drivers in the county.  Cllr. Finucane stated 
this will be a catalyst for further development in the county.  Shannon LNG has applied 
for an extension of their planning permission and this will also be a major economic 
boost to the county if it proceeds.   
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
9 of 41 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Thornton in relation to the 
meeting with TII and the Dale Road.  Sections of the N69 are in a poor condition and 
they were not mentioned in the Chief Executive’s Report.  There are significant 
deficiencies in the road network in North Kerry which need to be addressed. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae referred to the poor road surface at Coad Cross where a number of 
cars have been damaged and he asked that this would again be raised with the TII.  
The second phase of the Kenmare By-Pass is urgently needed and he understood 
suitable land would be offered for sale shortly.  He called on management to purchase 
this land.  Cllr. Healy-Rae welcomed the funding for LIS and he asked that the Scheme 
would be opened up to new applications early in 2018.  The Draft Speed Limit review 
was promised last year and he asked that the first Draft would be presented to 
members early in 2018. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty also asked that new applications would be invited for the LIS Scheme 
early in 2018 and if there is sufficient staff to undertake the additional work on this 
Scheme. He congratulated all involved in the MacGillycuddy Reeks Habitat and Trail 
Repair Project on their success at the Excellence in Local Government Awards 
recently.  This is a very important project for the county and he also congratulated Ms. 
P. Deenihan of SKDP who led this project.  In conclusion Cllr. Culloty highlighted that 
in the past members called for a reduction in the speed limit on the Killarney By-Pass 
and he failed to see why it was taking so long. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy acknowledged the generosity of the McShane Family who gifted 
Killarney House to the State.  He met their only daughter in Philadelphia and it was 
her dream to see the House restored.  Cllr. McCarthy welcomed the LIS funding. He 
thanked all involved in submitting the applications for funding to the     
Enterprise Ireland-led Regional Enterprise Fund and he added that these projects will 
benefit the economy of the county.  Members took the difficult decision to increase 
LPT to support these projects on a once off basis and as a result the people of Kerry 
are supporting the projects. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson complimented officials on their commitment since the LIS funding was 
restored.  All members were approached about the need to reduce the speed limit at 
Glenflesk and the Speed Limit Review should be given priority.  He called on 
management to pursue the construction of the Macroom By-Pass vigorously as it is 
critical for access to the county. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris welcomed the progress made with the TII in relation to the Lewis Road 
Junction.  She agreed with the concerns expressed by previous speakers in relation 
to roads in North Kerry and she pointed out there have been fatalities on these roads 
also.  Cllr. Ferris expressed concern that those who submitted applications under the 
LIS Scheme since 2010 are not on the list and may have to reapply and this is unfair.  
She called on management to ensure this will not happen.  Cllr. Ferris referred to the 
€64,500 allocated under the RAPID Programme under the theme of – Community 
Safety & Anti-Social Behaviour and questioned the use of the term ‘Anti-Social 
Behaviour’ and she asked that a more appropriate term would be used. 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
10 of 41 
 
Cllr. N. Foley acknowledged the beautiful setting in Killarney House for the meeting 
and she also acknowledged the work of Mr. Dawson and his staff.  She welcomed the 
new Kerry brand and asked that it would be included on all letter heads used by Kerry 
County Council as it is important to promote it at every opportunity.  Cllr. Foley 
welcomed the LIS funding which allowed in excess of 40 schemes to be undertaken 
in 2017.  In conclusion Cllr. Foley asked if temporary staff will now be made permanent 
in light of the LIS funding received. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted that the smaller projects that will receive funding under the 
Enterprise Ireland-led Regional Enterprise Development Fund are well located around 
the county.  She commended Mike Scannell and Bridget Fitzgerald for their work on 
the Stream 1 projects and she believed that jobs will be created both in the county and 
in the wider community as a result of these projects.  Cllr. Moriarty welcomed the LIS 
funding and asked that priority would be given to any Emergency and Hardship 
Scheme remaining on the list. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the success of Glenbeigh in achieving the runner up position 
in Category One of the Pride of Place Awards.  It would not be possible for any 
voluntary group to win without assistance from Kerry County Council and the level of 
interest in the Kerry Social Farming Project was phenomenal.  Cllr. Cahill highlighted 
that several sections of the Ring of Kerry, which is a tourism route, need attention.  He 
asked if roads can be repaired by filling potholes only under the LIS or must more 
substantial works be undertaken.  He called for the completion of the Speed Limit 
Review as a matter of priority. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg advised that he did not support the increase in LPT as his constituents 
have informed him they are not getting any service for this charge.  He suggested that 
a cross party committee should be established to come up with suggestions on how 
funding can be raised.  Housing should be a priority and at present private landlords 
are benefitting from government policy and construction of the promised houses in 
Killorglin has not yet commenced. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher asked how many applications for LIS are on file that have not been 
assessed and he added it would be unfair if they were disenfranchised and had to 
reapply.  He welcomed approval from TII to progress to design and planning for the 
Lewis Road Junction.  When the members for the Killarney MD meet with TII early in 
2018 they would emphasise the importance of improvements to this junction to them.  
In conclusion Cllr. Kelleher confirmed that a reduction in the speed limit at this location 
would also be helpful. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady advised that when Killarney Town Council was in place they highlighted 
the need to improve the Lewis Road/Kilcummin Road Junction to the NRA and a 
request to reduce the speed limit was also rejected by them.  He asked why the speed 
limit at Glenflesk is 100km per hour when it is only 60km per hour at Lissarda. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae welcomed the prioritising of the Lissivigeen to Farranfore road at 
the meeting with the TII.  She also referenced the condition of the Madams Hill road 
junction and highlighted issues in relation to the pedestrian crossing signage and 
speed limits in Glenflesk village.   Cllr. Healy-Rae asked that a bus shelter would be 
provided in the car park at the Train Station at Farranfore.  

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
11 of 41 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised that there was an ongoing investigation into an accident at 
this location and it is the policy of the Council to examine any measures/actions 
identified from such investigation. 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that the issues raised at the meeting with the 
TII as outlined in her Report were not all of the key issues raised with them.  The Dale 
Road is the responsibility of the Department of Transport and not the TII and she and 
the Director of Operations met with the Department in relation to the Dale Road.  The 
need for pavement overlays all over the county was discussed with the TII.  The 
national routes are the vulnerable routes and surveys were undertaken and issues 
were identified on the Ring of Kerry and these were discussed with the TII.  The 
Listowel By-Pass was also raised with the TII.  The need to link Kerry through Mallow 
with the Cork Limerick road was highlighted in our submission on the National 
Planning Framework.     
 
The Chief Executive referred to Cllr. Ferris’s comments on the RAPID Programme and 
she highlighted that Community Safety & Anti-Social Behaviour is a theme under this 
Programme.  The two Stream 1 projects will be of huge benefit both to the county and 
ITT.  The Speed Limit Review is a very lengthy process and there must be engagement 
with the TII on national routes while An Garda Siochana must also be consulted.  
Members have agreed dates in January for briefings on the Speed Limit Review in two 
Municipal Districts and the others will follow. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan acknowledged members’ frustration at the length of time it is taking 
to review Speed Limits.  However, there is a substantial amount of national road 
network in Kerry and extensive negotiations had to be undertaken with the TII on 
these.  Briefings will be held for the Killarney and South and West Kerry MD members 
in January and these will be followed by Tralee and Listowel.  There will then be further 
consultation with An Garda Siochana and the public.  Mr. O’Sullivan advised that there 
were 120 roads on the LIS list and with the present level of funding it is hoped to 
complete 40 in 2017.  A small number of applicants decided not to proceed with the 
works.  This leaves 70 on the list at an approx. cost of €1.5m and while funding was 
notified late in 2017 he understood it will be announced earlier in 2018.  He was 
hopeful that the vast majority of the remaining roads on the list will be funded in 2018.  
If significant funding is received in 2018 the Scheme will be re-opened and new 
applications invited.  He assured members that existing applicants will not be asked 
to re-submit their applications but confirmation will be sought that they wish to proceed 
with the application.  All applications on hand will have to be re-assessed if the Scheme 
is re-opened.  Work that can be undertaken under the LIS Scheme is prescribed by 
the Department.  Mr. O’Sullivan undertook to review the remaining Emergency and 
Hardship applications as requested.  While it is a challenge to bring national secondary 
routes up to standard he wanted to have designs ready for submission for funding for 
roads all over the county. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton again highlighted that roads in North Kerry are in a bad condition and 
she requested a written report on discussions at the meeting with the TII in relation to 
the N69.   
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
12 of 41 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae referred to the article in the Irish Examiner that day which stated 
that Maintenance Grants will be reduced by 30% in 2018 and he asked if this is 
accurate. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted that other counties did not increase LPT and they got similar 
if not higher funding.  She asked if the Car Park By-Laws will be available for 
consideration by the members in Q1 in 2018. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted a vulnerable section of the N69 from Kerry Co-op to 
Coolnaleen Cross.  At the last MD Meeting he requested that a priority list of all roads 
in the county would be drawn up. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin advised that on numerous occasions he asked that bus shelters would 
be provided on both sides of the road in Farranfore and a commitment was given to 
try to identify funding for them. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that the meeting with the TII is a high level meeting where 
they discuss strategic issues.  The N69 has been discussed and she was aware of the 
need to improve this road as well as roads in all Municipal Districts.  However, the TII 
can only deal with roads under their remit and when she meets with the Department 
other routes are discussed.  Members are provided with detailed reports on road works 
in their area at MD meetings.  The next 3 year Roads Programme will be compiled in 
the near future and priorities can be identified at that time.  The Chief Executive 
assured members that she represents the needs of the entire county fairly.  She 
confirmed there would be a reduction in maintenance funding in 2018 but assurances 
have been given that centralised funding will be available and local authorities can 
apply for funding for specific roads. 
 
Ms. A. McAllen confirmed that a commitment was given to further consider the 
provision of bus shelters in Farranfore. 
 
17.12.11.03 Lease of property 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the lease of 144m² of office accommodation located in 
the Castleisland Carnegie Building in the townland of Knockananlig, 
Castleisland to Castleisland Chamber Alliance by way of a 15 year lease in 
accordance with the terms of notice issued 28th November 2017 pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 and Section 211(5) 
of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. T. McEllistrim it 
was agreed to approve the lease of a Unit which is a single storey 
warehouse/workshop measuring 900 sq. ft. located at the rear of Charles 
Street, Listowel in the DED of Listowel Urban to (Name and address withheld 
for data protection purposes.  A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available 
on request) by way of a 4 years 11 months lease in accordance with the terms 
of notice issued 28th November 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
13 of 41 
 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it 
was agreed to lease a plot of ground measuring circa 43 sq. meters (0.01 acres) 
at the rear of Kenmare Carnegie Building to Kenmare Carnegie Arts Centre Ltd 
by way of an 88 year lease in accordance with the terms of notice issued 28th 
November 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
Section 211 and Section 211 (5) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 
and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
17.12.11.04 Date for Governance Training for Members 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Finucane it was agreed 
that Governance Training for members would be held on Monday 29th January 2018 
at 10.30am. 
 
17.12.11.05 Progress on the rollout of the Broadband Scheme in Kerry 
 
Mr. M. Scannell briefed members on progress on the rollout of the Broadband Scheme 
in Kerry as follows.   The Government’s National Broadband Plan aims to provide all 
citizens and businesses in Ireland with access to high speed broadband through 
supporting commercial investment and direct state-led intervention. 
 
Eir are currently rolling out fibre to an additional 26,000 properties mainly rural 
premises in Kerry as part of the rollout nationally to 300,000 properties with a target 
completion date of December 2018.  As per the Department of Communications out 
of a total of 89,000 premises in Kerry – 60,000 (68%) will have access to high speed 
broadband by the end of 2018 following Eir roll out.  In Kerry 29,000 properties will 
remain outside of commercial fibre roll out schemes after 2018 and they are in the 
“State Intervention Area” to be covered by the National Broadband Plan.  Mr. Scannell 
briefed the meeting further on this topic under the following headings: 
 
• Status of National Broadband Plan 
• Status of Eir Fibre Roll out in Kerry 
• Other Initiatives. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated the Government has promised the roll out of broadband for years 
but progress is very slow.  In the areas where high speed broadband has been 
provided houses, schools and business premises have been omitted.  There are job 
opportunities if a high speed broadband services was available. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that the mobile phone coverage at Muckross House is 
very poor.  Some people are disadvantaged as the broadband speed is too slow to 
allow them access supports for those with special needs.  He called for equality of 
opportunity for all. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that many cul-de-sacs were omitted and the availability of 
high speed broadband cannot be over emphasised as most services must now be 
accessed online. 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
14 of 41 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated 29,000 properties in Kerry will remain outside of commercial fibre 
roll out schemes after 2018 and it is evident where the current roll out stopped.  On 
the road from Cleeney House to Barleymount the installation of high speed broadband 
stopped half way up the road.  Farmers can do the Green Cert online where they have 
high speed broadband.   The more profitable areas are being prioritised but everyone 
is entitled to a high speed service now. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated it is evident from the first map displayed that priority is being 
given to the East Coast while there are gaps on the West Coast.  The core of Milltown 
has high speed broadband but the outskirts of the town do not and he asked that it 
would be extended to residential estates in Milltown.  Mobile phone coverage in 
Milltown is completely inadequate and must be addressed also. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen acknowledged that there have been improvements in the 
provision of high speed broadband and this will improve further by the end of 2018.  
Caha National School have difficulty downloading material and they are in a State 
Intervention Area and he asked when can they expect to get a decent service.  He 
also requested an update on the roll out of high speed broadband in Blackwater and 
Lauragh. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that mobile phone coverage is not great in the Killarney area 
but he acknowledged that good progress has been made in the last year. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae advised that Firies, Barraduff and Farranfore are mobile phone 
black spots where there is virtually no coverage.  This is unacceptable when people 
are running a business.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae referred to Tuosist Parish which is 23 miles long and is in decline.  
While Sneem has high speed broadband areas like Tuosist need this lifeline in order 
to survive.  Mobile phone coverage is very poor at Farranfore and in surrounding areas 
and this is very bad from a tourism point of view.  He called on mobile phone 
companies to address this as a matter of priority. 
 
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised members that the Broadband Officer identified 6,000 
properties to be provided with high speed broadband and he anticipated areas such 
as the outskirts of Milltown and Tuosist would be delivered in the coming months. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 1.45pm. 
 
The meeting resumed at 2.45pm. 
 
17.12.11.06 Excellence in Local Government Awards 
 
Mr. M. Scannell informed the meeting that the Excellence in Local Government 
Awards recognise best practice in local government and are held annually in 
conjunction with the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government.  The 
MacGillycuddy Reeks Habitat and Trail Repair Project – A Collaborative Rural 
Economic Development Zone (REDZ) Initiative won the Category of Sustainable 
Environment at the Excellence in Local Government Awards Event recently.  This was 
a significant project with the following partners:- Kerry County Council, South Kerry 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
15 of 41 
 
Development Partnership, MacGillycuddy Reeks Mountain Access Forum, the 
Department of Rural and Community Development, Fáilte Ireland, the NPWS and the 
local community and most importantly the Participants and Landowners.   
 
Mr. Scannell briefed members on this project under the following headings: 
 
• Overview 
• Project Participants 
• Breanlee Access Track 
• Leisleibane Track 
• Cronins Yard Track 
• Continuation of the Repair Work 
 
Mr. Scannell advised that three additional projects from around the county received 
commendations at these Awards: 
 
1. Welcoming the Stranger – Sustaining the arts 
2. The Milltown Community and Chamber Alliance – Best practice in citizen 
engagement 
3. Taste Kerry – Promoting Economic Development. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson then moved Notice of Motion No. 21. 
 
21. 
Call to put in place a Scheme of reasonable and responsible access to 
our countryside 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
“That in view of the importance of Rural Tourism to the survival of local communities 
that the Government in consultation with all interested groups and organisations would 
put in place a properly regulated and legally sound scheme of reasonable and 
responsible access to our countryside. Rural communities and local small businesses 
would be the immediate beneficiaries as has been shown to be the case in counties 
and other countries where such ordered access exists.” 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated the success of the MacGillycuddy Reeks Project shows the 
economic benefit to the county.  He displayed the Archaeological Inventory Volume 1 
which refers to South and West Kerry only which is substantial.  This reflects the 
richness of our county and it details the rich artefacts in that area.  Cllr. Gleeson called 
on the Government to introduce immunity for landowners who allow visitors through 
their land.  The establishment of defined tourism trails both cultural and archaeological 
would be of significant economic benefit to the county.     
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and welcomed the collaborative approach on 
the MacGillycuddy Reeks project.  This project not only benefits the economy of the 
area but it also has health benefits.  He hoped work would commence on the Devils 
Ladder as soon as possible. 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
16 of 41 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed Mr. Scannell’s excellent presentation together with the 
involvement of landowners in this project.  Many visitors travel to Kerry to avail of the 
leisure facilities and this will encourage more visitors to Kerry.  The Chief Operations 
Officer with Ryanair lives in Killarney and he PROPOSED that he would be invited to 
a Council meeting.  Cllr. Finucane then referred to the greenway from Tralee to Fenit 
and he asked that there would be consultation with the local community.  The 
availability of walkways is critically important to attract visitors to the county.   
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen supported Cllr. Gleeson’s motion and added that the 
protection of landowners must be taken more seriously.  He welcomed progress to-
date on the MacGillycuddy Reeks project and he asked when work would commence 
on the Devil’s Ladder. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg supported the views expressed by Cllr. Finucane. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the inclusion of farmers in the work on the MacGillycuddy 
Reeks paths and he paid tribute to Patricia Deane for her commitment to this project.  
In conclusion Cllr. Cahill stated he understood there is a plan to train farmers as guides 
which would be very beneficial for them. 
 
The Cathaoirleach acknowledged the work of all involved in the MacGillycuddy Reeks 
project. 
 
17.12.11.07 Report on the Quality of Life SPC Meeting held on 30th Nov. 2017 
 
It was agreed to note Cllr. N. Kelleher’s report on the meeting of the Quality of Life 
SPC held on the 30th November 2017. 
 
17.12.11.08 Summary of proceedings at an AILG Training Event 
 
It was agreed to noted Cllr. T. McEllistrim’s report on the AILG Training Event on the 
theme “”Wellbeing for Councillors” on behalf of the Kerry County Council delegates 
that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
Approval for the opening of tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. T. Ferris it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Construction of 21 housing 
units at Killeen Road, Killeen, Tralee – Closing date Wednesday 17th January 
2018 at 3pm. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Fossa to Gap of Dunloe 
Greenway – Supply and Installation of Deer Fencing, Fossa, Killarney as 
follows: 
 
Lot 1 – Fossa to Gap of Dunloe Greenway – Supply & Installation of Deer 
Fencing at Maulagh, Fossa, Killarney – Closing date Friday 22nd December 
2017 at 4pm. 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
17 of 41 
 
Lot 2 - Fossa to Gap of Dunloe Greenway – Supply & Installation of Deer 
Fencing at Lismongane, Fossa, Killarney – Closing date Friday 22nd 
December 2017 at 4pm. 
 
17.12.11.09 Notices of Motion 
 
1. Public Refuse Collection Services 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would investigate the possibility of providing a public 
refuse collection service in areas currently only serviced by private providers. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The decision by Kerry County Council to withdraw from the Waste Collection 
Service in 2011 was made after a comprehensive review of the business.  At 
that time, the business was losing customers and was financially unviable.  
Kerry County Council has no plans to extend the waste collection business 
beyond the service currently provided in Killarney.  The infrastructural costs 
alone of re-entering the business would be prohibitive and nothing has 
changed to indicate that a viable refuse service could be operated by the 
Council at this time. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris advised that she disagreed with Management’s decision to exit the 
refuse service in 2011 and her motion should be considered in light of the cost of 
dealing with illegal dumping.  Recent surveys indicated that people prefer to support 
a public service.  While she acknowledged the significant capital cost of setting up 
the service she asked that it would be given serious consideration as she believed a 
viable service could be provided even if it was just in the towns.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion. 
 
2.  Provision of a dedicated Stroke Unit at UHK 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
As the second National Health Quality Report of 2016 showed significant decreases 
in hospital mortality of between 21% and 25% for Stroke victims where the 22 
Dedicated Stroke Units exist, that this Council seeks clarification from the HSE in 
relation to how close to realization is the long requested Dedicated Stroke Unit in 
Kerry University Hospital. I have consistently been placing this urgent matter on the 
agenda of Council meetings since around 2002 as I believe that Kerry based victims 
of Stroke are entitled to equality of opportunity to survive and to the highest quality 
care and rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“When I first placed a Motion calling for a Stroke Unit in Kerry General Hospital all of 
14 years ago, Dr Ronan Collins, the foremost spokesperson for the Aged and infirm 
stated at an IMO conference in Killarney that the Stroke facilities in Ireland were a 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
18 of 41 
 
national disgrace and an insult to all who had served their country through work and 
family. At that time there was only one full Stroke Unit in Ireland There have been 
many similar Motions since that time and progress was painfully slow. No doubt 
some people have needlessly died or did not make the maximum possible levels of 
recovery. We have all known individuals who suffered Stroke and failed the get to a 
Dedicated Stroke Unit before the 3- hour deadline. 
 
But thankfully the years of pleading have finally borne fruit and such a Unit will soon 
be up and functioning in Kerry University Hospital.  Indeed, this Unit will, I believe, be 
the 22nd in Ireland. That is truly wonderful progress. It is progress that is a positive 
response to a very real and urgent need.  
 
I want to compliment the local Stroke Unit Support Group that has worked might and 
main to achieve their objective. Thanks also to Dr Liston and his team for their hard 
work. I thank the members of this Council past and present for your support for my 
Notices of Motion over the past 14 years.  I do hope that when the one in five of us 
who suffer Stroke, become victims that the Dedicated Unit will be there to lead us to 
as full a recovery as possible. 
 
The only clarification that I wish to seek is to determine if a full complement of all 
necessary staff including -  Geriatricians, physiotherapists and speech therapists will 
be available to serve and service 7 days a week, 52 weeks a year.  Properly staffed 
Stroke Units will inevitably lead to a better outcome for patients and will also be less 
costly to the national exchequer as length of stay in hospitals will be reduced and 
there will be reduced need for follow on treatment and care.” 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion and added that he used every opportunity to 
highlight the need for a dedicated Stroke Unit at UHK at meetings of the Regional 
Health Forum.  He welcomed the opening of the dedicated Stroke Unit at UHK and 
added that the critical factor is the timeframe for the opening of the Unit. 
 
3. Quality label for accessible tourism through ENAT 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Kelleher PROPOSED: 
That this Council explore achieving the quality label for accessible Tourism through 
ENAT (European Network for Accessible Tourism) in conjunction with Fáilte Ireland 
and the Tourism providers of the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Accessibility is a major theme in our County Tourism Strategy and its 
importance to both the domestic and international markets is highlighted 
under a number of key objectives.  To commence the development of 
accessibility for all, Killarney has been chosen as the pilot town, with the 
support of ENAT and Fáilte Ireland. 
 
Work will progress towards developing Killarney town as an accessible 
tourism destination in cooperation with Fáilte Ireland as financial resources 
become available. 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
19 of 41 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher highlighted that this accreditation would be of significant benefit to 
Kerry and Killarney.  It is important that the audit is completed so that the barriers 
can be identified.  Cllr. Kelleher asked for a commitment that once the audit is 
completed it will be delivered on. 
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that any works undertaken will take account of the 
findings of the audit.  Some issues identified may not be too costly to implement 
while others will require significant time to deliver. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
4. Installation of CCTV in Killarney 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council when we can expect to have CCTV installed in 
Killarney. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A detailed submission was made to the Department of Justice & Equality for 
capital funding towards the following three separate schemes in the Killarney 
area: 
 
• Killarney Town Centre 
• Killarney Outer 
• Ballyspillane 
 
This followed work undertaken in the Killarney Municipal District in 
partnership with businesses, community groups, the local Gardaí and the 
Joint Policing Committee. 
 
Further information is requested by the funding Department and formal 
approval of the Garda Commissioner is awaited.  In parallel to this, Killarney 
Municipal District staff are preparing Tender documentation for the supply and 
installation of the CCTV schemes subject to receipt of grant funding. 
Applications are currently being assessed under the Revamped RAPID 
Programme – Community Safety & Anti-Social Behaviours. A total fund of €64k 
has been made available to the council in respect of same.  
 
We will revert to Members when we receive an update. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan welcomed the funding allocated and he asked that a further 
application for funding would be submitted.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion and added that funding is not available to 
maintain the existing system in Killorglin.  
 
 
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
20 of 41 
 
5. Capacity of wind energy in Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
What is the present capacity in megawatts of electricity, that can be produced by 
wind energy in Kerry and what proportion that is in terms of the national wind output. 
What is the number of megawatts with planning granted in the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
According to Eirgrids TSO Connected Renewable Generation List and ESB 
Networks Distribution Connected-Energised Wind list, on the 5th October 2017 
the maximum export capacity of installed and operational wind farms in Kerry 
was 329MW. National installed wind capacity on the same date was 3,049MW. 
Therefore 10.8% of national maximum export capacity was located in Co. Kerry 
on this date.  
 
An additional 235MW has recently been constructed but not yet connected to 
the grid or is under construction. It is anticipated that this 235MW additional 
capacity will be connected to the National Grid over the coming months.  
 
Approximately 800MW of wind energy has been granted permission in Kerry. 
This figure includes constructed and not constructed wind developments.  
 
Cllr. J. Lucid read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“We have spoken at length about wind energy recently and what I want to do today 
is to look at some facts. 
 
Wind Energy itself is a positive means of reducing our dependency on fossil fuel 
powered energy generation.  It reduces our carbon footprint and hopefully assists a 
slowing of climate change.  The Country has had targets set for it which it is 
expected to achieve etc. 
 
There is just over 4000 megawatts of Wind Energy capacity on the island, with 
976MW in Northern Ireland.  In the Republic, Munster leads the way with 1550MW 
out of 3,035. 
 
In Kerry we had 330MW but we have 113 turbines under construction which will add 
a further 250MW giving a total of 580MW.  This means that there will be more Wind 
Energy capacity in Kerry than there is in any country and also that there will be more 
in Kerry than there is in Connaught, Ulster or Leinster. 
 
Two thirds of wind turbines in the county are located in the Listowel and Tralee area 
of North Kerry.  This heavy concentration of development is a major concern for the 
area.  We are all aware of the negative impacts for people living in these locations, 
during construction, noise, shadow etc. and the loss of value of family homes. 
 
These facts show that there is a complete absence of any national strategy for Wind 
Energy Development.  I am asking Kerry County Council to call on the Minster with 
responsibility for planning in this area to review policy and put a proper strategy in 
place and to suspend any further development until such time as this is done. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
21 of 41 
 
 
Other means of reducing our CFP such as solar panels, electric vehicles need to be 
incentivised.”  
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion and highlighted that despite the number of 
wind farm developments in the county there has been no reduction in the cost to the 
consumer.   
 
6. Call to ratify the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Government to ratify the UN Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated Ireland is the only country that has not ratified the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  The aim of the Convention is 
to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their 
inherent dignity.  She understood the reason the Convention has not been ratified in 
Ireland is that it requires a change in legislation yet some countries ratified the 
Convention without the legislation in place.  Cllr. Thornton requested that a letter would 
issue to the Department of Foreign Affairs calling on them to ratify the Convention and 
to publish a timescale for ratification. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
7. Appointment of a Micro Biologist Consultant to UHK 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the Minister for Health requesting that a Micro Biologist 
Consultant be appointed to UHK immediately. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg requested that the resolution be referred to the Minister for Health for 
consideration. 
 
Cllr. S Locke SECONDED the motion. 
 
8. Assistance to youth services in the county 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
What organisations do Kerry County Council assist in the provision of youth services 
in the County. 
 
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
22 of 41 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council has a long association with supporting youth services. The 
Community Department for example is responsible for co-ordinating Kerry's 
Comhairle na nÓg. Kerry County Council works with the Kerry Diocesan Youth 
Service to ensure the ongoing development and involvement of young people 
in Kerry's Comhairle na nÓg. The AGM was held on the 13th of October this year 
where over 100 young people aged 12-18 participated in a number of workshops. 
The Community Department and Municipal Districts are also working with local 
communities and chamber alliances to identify youth needs and to provide 
appropriate responses together with the relevant agencies e.g. the Mitchel's 
Youth Project, Youth Facility in Milltown etc. The Council has also supported a 
number of Youth Initiatives and projects under the Community Support Fund 
and Rural Grant Schemes such as youth cafes, outdoor recreational facilities, 
workshops on mental health etc. The Kerry Recreation Sports Partnership also 
supports initiatives that get young people active such as the Junior Park Run 
and Swim for a mile for teens. Also as the contracting authority for the Social 
Inclusion 
Community 
Activation 
Programme, 
a 
number 
of 
programmes/interventions are implemented to specifically target young adults 
not currently in education or employment with a few to facilitating their 
progression. Beyond the Community Department there are other youth 
initiatives managed by the Environment section, Libraries etc. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“The issue of rural disadvantage has been of particular concern for KDYS, where 
lack of availability of services, lack of transport and infrastructure has increased the 
isolation of young people and communities outside of urban centres.  In some 
communities one of the only remaining outlets for young people is the local youth 
club. 
 
In addition, recent policy changes have had a significant impact on voluntary led 
clubs, placing an increased reporting demand on volunteers who run clubs, including 
youth clubs.  At the same time the resources allocated to organisations to support 
volunteers have been reduced, creating obvious difficulties in continuing to provide 
high quality supports to volunteers, and to young people in already isolated 
communities. 
 
Government policy in how services for young people are delivered, and recent 
reforms in this area, is creating an environment where creating new, innovative 
responses for all the young people in an area is no longer possible except through 
targeted work focusing on specific groups. 
 
KDYS provides invaluable spaces through its Youth and Community centres, 
available to all young people, in 5 locations, providing critical outlets in these areas. 
No funding is currently available to support these outlets, or to create additional 
similar outlets and services. 
 
The role of youth work, and the value it creates in the lives of young people, their 
families and their communities is misunderstood and devalued, Youth work changes 
lives for the better.  It needs greater re-sourcing and support. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
23 of 41 
 
 
Other issues for young people in Kerry include: 
 
Drug & Alcohol use: problematic drug and alcohol use being highlighted by KDYS 
staff working with young people as an issue together with the  under re-sourcing of 
access community based drug services in some areas. 
 
Anxiety/Mental health issues:  There is a notable increase in young people 
presenting with issues of anxiety, serf- harm, eating disorders, low serf – esteem, 
depression and suicidal thoughts. These issues are exacerbated by lack of access, 
or poor access to services and the increasing issue of rural decline. 
 
Youth unemployment:  remains an issue for young people, although improving the 
issue remains and programmes that support young people, particularly those at risk 
and hard to reach, need greater levels of resourcing.  Also responses that encourage 
entrepreneurship in young people should be supported and resources.” 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion. 
 
9. Facilities for the homeless 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Grady PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council must look at ways to improve all facilities for the homeless 
where we can. What living facilities do we have in each Municipal District and how 
many beds are available for the homeless in those Municipal Districts. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has 9 beds block booked in a facility in Killarney available 
for homeless clients.  There are also other beds in the same facility (should they 
be required) for family units which are also wheelchair accessible. 
 
In Tralee, there is a 14 bed facility for individuals run by Novas and Kerry County 
Council has also block booked 8 beds in a privately owned accommodation 
facility in Tralee for individuals which has a ground floor apartment for family 
type units with wheelchair accessibility.  There are also two other privately 
owned accommodation facilities in Tralee that Kerry County Council can place 
clients and families in if the need arises.  
 
Kerry County Council has also identified 22 short term transitional properties 
throughout the County, from the Council Housing Stock which are used to 
accommodate homeless and vulnerable families. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that more needs to be done for the homeless.  Families from 
Killarney are given accommodation in Tralee and they must drive to Killarney to bring 
their children to school.  This is not acceptable and adequate facilities should be 
provided in Killarney.   Cllr. Grady asked that additional funding for the homeless would 
be sought from the Government. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
24 of 41 
 
10.     Call to re-introduce Town Councils 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Taoiseach and the Government to reintroduce 
Town Council’s as a matter of urgency as the abolition of Town Council’s has had a 
detrimental effect on Tourism, Job Creation and the provision of services in the 3 main 
towns in Kerry.  
 
The following reply issued: 
While it is not the intention to comment on the revision of structures of local 
government which are subject to Private Members Bills in the Oireachtas, Kerry 
County Council has clearly established structures within the County to deal with 
Economic & Community Development across the county including Tourism, Job 
Creation, and the Provision of Services. These structures have evolved under 
the reform of local government and have been established to meet the wider 
economic and community brief as set out in “Putting People First” and the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014.   
  
The roll out of the Economic Development Unit, the integration of the Local 
Enterprise Office into the local authority structure and the assignment of staff 
to support these roles both at county and municipal district level has provided 
strong support for enterprise across the county and resulted in significant 
progress in both town and rural areas.   
  
The Local Enterprise Office work closely with start-ups/established companies 
in the provision of grant aid, mentoring, micro-finance, core training 
programmes, on-line vouchers, food academy supports and a range of other 
supports. In 2017 alone 25 projects received €346k in grant support to 
potentially create 69 full-time and 64 part time additional employment positions.  
103 mentoring assignments have been approved and 816 people have 
undertaken targeted training to date this year.  
  
Kerry County Council has actively supported the development of Economic 
Infrastructure Employment HUBS in Sneem, Castleisland, Dingle.  The Local 
Authority supports the Science and Tech Cluster in Kerry SCI-TECH as a vehicle 
for marketing the county and attracting both investment and skilled employment 
to the county. The Council has also supported two significant research and 
innovation projects in association with the IT Tralee and leading private sector 
companies in the county and we await the outcome of funding applications in 
respect of same. The Council has also partnered with the IDA in developing a 
promotional package for the County “Invest in Kerry”.   
  
In the towns of Tralee, Killarney & Listowel, the Council has worked with 
Chamber Alliances in a structured and productive manner. The recent success 
by both Tralee & Listowel in their achievements of overall national winner and 
regional runner up in the Enterprise Town awards is a huge success for the 
County.  The retention of the Purple Flag in Killarney and Tralee’s achievement 
in securing it for the first time is a clear indicator of strong business co-
operation at local level.  The continued high success of all three towns in the 
National Town Awards is further evidence of high levels of engagement in all 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
25 of 41 
 
three centres.  Tralee’s Town Centre Health Check in association with the 
Heritage Council and the associated public realm plan and Listowel’s Heritage 
Town Plan provide an avenue for further improvements in these areas. 
 
The Kerry Tourism Strategy and Action Plan 2016, which involved significant 
research and public consultation under the umbrella of Destination Kerry with 
key stakeholders throughout the county, provide a framework for strengthening 
of the tourism product throughout Kerry.  Kerry County Council has a 
designated Tourism Unit advancing and progressing the Strategy across the 
County.  Very significant progress has been made in delivering the actions in 
the Strategy and specific key deliverables include: -  
  
- Kerry Local Authority Role in the development of Business Tourism; - 
Maximisation of Regional Rural Grants and the Town & Village Funding to 
advance Tourism Infrastructure; - County Brand; - Increased focus and support 
for Festivals and Mayoral Events;  
  
There are also significant economic and cultural projects being planned or 
underway in these towns, including the Tralee Town Centre West (Denny Site) 
Master plan & redevelopment, Arás Phádraig Killarney, the renovation of the 
cultural centre and the proposed expressions of interest for the Sara Lee site 
and the design of the Listowel Greenway.   
  
Investment continues to be made in upgrading the fabric of urban centres in the 
county. Major infrastructural improvements have been undertaken in Tralee, 
Killarney & Listowel in recent times, these including the Smarter Travel Project 
in Tralee involving pedestrianisation, introduction of revised traffic flows and 
major environmental improvements   
  
Kerry County Council, through the adoption of the Development Contributions 
Scheme 2017, has incentivised economic development through significant 
reductions in the level of contributions across all sectors (Industrial, 
Commercial & residential) in both Tralee & Killarney, with more modest 
reductions in Listowel.  
  
The revision of the Town Development Plans in each area together with the 
adoption of Municipal District Plans will further guide the development of these 
areas and target areas that require commercial incentives scheme to encourage 
private sector investment.  
  
In summary Kerry County Council recognises the interdependence of urban & 
rural areas throughout the County and at this point have a comprehensive 
structure and policy framework to incorporate strategic economic, job creation 
& tourism objectives and identifying actions/schemes to revitalise towns & 
villages and their associated rural catchments.  
 
Cllr. M. Cahill advised that all town councils took great pride in their towns.  Killarney 
is the biggest tourism town in Ireland but it does not have a Town Council.  
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
26 of 41 
 
 
11.     Occupational First Aid Training for teachers and SNAs 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That Occupational First Aid Training become compulsory for all physically able 
teachers and SNAs and will be fully funded by the Government and will be known as 
Isabelles Law. That we as a Council forward this to Minister for Health, Simon Harris, 
Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Minister Zappone and Minister for Education. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty stated at present this training is not compulsory and it would be 
desirable that as many teachers and SNAs as possible would undertake the training. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
12. Guidelines for NCT 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
That, when the contract with the current provider expires, this Council urges the 
Minister to issue guidelines that motor vehicles will only be issued with a “Fail” in the 
NCT when there is a mechanical fault which renders the vehicle less safe to drive. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly highlighted that at present a Spanish company has the contract for NCT 
but it is up for renewal in 6 months.  It is important that the NCT Manual only includes 
issues that would render the vehicle unfit to drive.  If a person presents a vehicle for 
NCT that is not theirs the test will not proceed and he asked for more flexibility on 
these issues. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
13. 
Call to condemn proposals to exclude part time farmers from payment 
under the new round of CAP 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
We the members of the Kerry County Council would condemn outright proposals by 
the EU Commissioner for Agriculture Mr Phil Hogan to exclude part time farmers from 
payment under the new round of CAP proposals, that we would send our objection to 
the Minister for Agriculture Michael Creed and to the EU Commissioner for Agriculture 
Phil Hogan. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea pointed out that of 139,000 farmers in Ireland, 70,000 are part time 
and the majority of Kerry farmers work part time.  There is a proposal under the new 
CAP Programme that part time farmers will not qualify for payments.  Most part time 
farmers must have a second job as their holdings are small and would not be viable.  

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
27 of 41 
 
Cllr. O’Shea asked that a letter would issue to Minister Creed asking that there would 
not be a reduction in the income of part time farmers.   
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton moved Notice of Motion No. 14 on behalf of Cllr. Kennelly. 
 
14.    Call to carry out immediate flood relief works at Clieveragh, Listowel 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council immediately carry out flood relief works through the OPW 
in The Clieveragh Area of Listowel as again through severe flooding on the 22nd 
November homes were destroyed. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the severe weather events of 2015, in which the drainage network 
upstream and within the Clieveragh Industrial Estate overflowed, resulting in 
flood damage to some industrial units and an adjoining dwelling, Kerry County 
Council commissioned Consulting Engineers to undertake a Preliminary Flood 
Risk Option Assessment in the Clieveragh area of Listowel.  
 
This report, published in May 2016 identified a preferred option, which includes 
the construction of an impoundment area, a flow diversion channel and 
associated works, to mitigate against the potential risk of flooding in the 
Clieveragh Industrial Estate. The estimated cost of these works is €0.5 million. 
Having considered the findings of this report, the Council has engaged locally 
on the feasibility of securing the necessary lands and actively pursued the OPW 
for funding to progress the scheme.  
 
A further application was made to the OPW in October 2016 for funding to design 
and construct the scheme and an offer of funding was received in October 2017, 
towards the cost of site investigations, detailed design, preparation of tender 
documents and land acquisition. Funding was not approved towards the 
construction costs, for which a further application must be made on completion 
of the detailed design and having obtained planning consent.  
 
The appointment of Consulting Engineers is currently being procured and it is 
anticipated on having the appointment made and the detailed design complete 
by April 2018. Following completion of the detailed design, the Council will seek 
planning consent and make a further application to the OPW for the 
construction costs.  
 
Whilst acknowledging the impact of the exceptional rainfall on the Clieveragh 
area, the progression of the scheme is conditional on funding from the OPW. 
The Council has also engaged with Shannon Commercial Properties, who own 
and manage the Industrial Estate, for financial contribution towards the cost of 
the works. 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
28 of 41 
 
15. 
Call to introduce a dedicated passport/identity check lane for arrivals into 
Dublin Airport from all Irish airports 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Moloney PROPOSED: 
That this Council request the Department of Justice and Dublin Airport Authority to 
introduce a special dedicated passport/identity check lane for arrivals into Dublin 
Airport from all Irish airports. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted when passengers from regional airports arrive in Dublin 
they must queue with international travellers to get through customs.  In Luton all main 
land Europe passengers go through a dedicated lane. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
16. 
Call to reintroduce the Bóthar Áise Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. S. Fitzgerald PROPOSED: 
That we the members of Kerry County Council call on Roinn na Gaeltachta to 
reintroduce the Bóthar Áise Scheme. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald highlighted that the Bóthar Áise Scheme was suspended in 2009 
and many roads have started to deteriorate in the interim.  He requested that the 
resolution would be forwarded to the Minister for the Gaeltacht for consideration and 
that it would be circulated to all local authorities for their support. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
17. 
Number of local authority houses in Kerry and the annual maintenance 
budget 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
How many Local Authority houses do Kerry County Council own currently in 2017 and 
how much maintenance money is provided for these houses. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council own 4,207 dwellings across the County.  
 
The maintenance budget for 2017 is €3.423m. Of this, an amount of €1.5m is 
allocated for works on vacant house. 
We also have a planned maintenance programme for 2017 for an amount of 
€465,000. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae pointed out it is getting increasingly difficult to get small 
maintenance jobs done for tenants.  She outlined a number of cases which cannot be 
resolved as the level of funding is inadequate.  She PROPOSED that the maintenance 
budget be increased. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
29 of 41 
 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane highlighted that the maintenance budget is €3.42m. 
 
The Chief Executive clarified of the €3.42m provided in the Budget €1.5m is for the 
repair of vacant houses. 
 
18. 
North Kerry Landfill Site 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
As the North Kerry Landfill Site at Muingnaminnane has been closed for three years, 
I ask this Council to give: 1) A Progress Report on actions taken to find alternative 
uses for this site. 2) Why has it taken so long for Consultants to complete their work, 
considering they were engaged to begin this work last April 3) To give details of 
Consultants Report. 4) How much has been paid to Consultants since the site closed? 
5) What is the current status of this site regarding planning.   
 
The following report issued: 
1.  
In 2015, a Voluntary Market Sounding exercise was carried out seeking 
expressions of interest from interested market participants on possible 
commercial options for the future of the North Kerry Landfill Site.  Three 
submissions were received and assessed at the time.  Due to the 
complexities involved from an environmental, legislative and financial 
perspective, it was necessary to engage consultants to assist and best 
advise Kerry County Council on how to achieve the optimal use(s) for the 
site having regard to more recent market developments.  The 
procurement process to appoint consultants commenced in late 2016 and 
Fehilly Timoney & Co. (FTC) were appointed in April 2017.  
  
2.  
The Consultants had to carry out an extensive review of all the available 
documentation and information relating to this substantial and complex 
site which is also licensed by the Environmental Protection Agency.  The 
‘Expressions of Interest’ documentation was published on the 12th 
November and the closing date for receipt of submissions is the 14th 
December.  
  
3.  
Once the closing date for submissions has passed, the Consultants will 
prepare a report on the submissions received and an update will be 
provided to Council.  
  
4.  
The following payments have been made to Consultants since the site 
closed:  
  
2015  
No.
Consultant
Project 
Description 
Cost 
(Excl 
VAT) 
Justification
Date
1. 
Zenit 
Land 
Surveys  
 
Topographical 
Survey 
of 
monitoring points 
€800   
Compliance 
with 
Licence Conditions  
 
June 
2015 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
30 of 41 
 
2. 
Odour 
Monitoring 
Ireland  
 
Gas 
Survey 
of 
Landfill Capping 
€1,750  Request by the EPA May 
2015  
 
 
TOTAL 
€2,550   
 
 
 
All these costs relate to EPA Licence Condition Requirements.  
 
2016  
No.
 
Consultant
Project 
Description 
Cost 
(Excl 
VAT)  
 
Justification
Date 
 
1.  
 
Fehily 
Timoney 
& 
Co  
 
Risk 
Screening 
and 
technical 
assessment 
of 
groundwater 
and 
all discharges  
 
€3,400   
Compliance 
with 
Licence 
Conditions  
 
Feb 
2016  
 
2. 
Millennium 
Surveys Ltd  
 
Topographical 
Survey 
of 
the 
Landfill cap 
€1,850   
Compliance 
with 
Licence 
Conditions  
 
Feb 
2016  
 
3.  
 
Odour 
Monitoring 
Ireland  
Gas 
Survey 
of 
Landfill Capping 
€1,750   
Request 
by 
the 
EPA 
May 
2015  
 
4.
 
Fehily 
Timoney 
& 
Co  
 
Landfill 
Gas 
Assessment of the 
gas infrastructure 
on site  
 
€21,278  
 
EPA Compliance 
Request  
 
Feb 
2016  
 
5. 
UMAC 
Systems  
 
Installation 
of 
a 
new 
telemetry 
system 
€5,320   
Compliance 
with 
Licence 
Conditions  
 
June 
2016  
 
TOTAL
€33,598  
 All these costs relate to EPA Licence Condition Requirements.   
 
2017  
No.
 
Consultant
Project 
Description 
Cost (Excl 
VAT)  
 
Justification
Date 
 
1.  
 
Aspiro Ltd  
 
Servicing 
of 
the 
Gas 
Detection 
System at North 
Kerry Landfill  
 
€710 
Waste 
Licence 
Condition  
 
Feb 
2017  
 
2. 
Fehily 
Timoney 
& 
Company  
Review 
of 
the 
Environmental Risk 
Assessment  
€2,750 
Waste 
Licence 
Condition  
 
Feb 
2017  
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
31 of 41 
 
 
 
3.  
 
Millennium 
Surveys Ltd  
 
Topographical 
Survey 
of 
the 
Landfill cap 
€2,050  
 
Compliance 
with 
Licence Conditions 
 
Feb 
2017  
 
4.
 
Odour 
Monitoring 
Ireland  
 
Gas 
Survey 
of 
Landfill Capping 
€1,610 
Request 
by 
the 
EPA  
 
Feb 
2017  
 
5. 
Fehily 
Timoney 
& 
Co  
 
Slope 
Stability 
Assessment 
€1,490  
 
Compliance 
with 
Waste 
Licence 
Conditions  
 
Feb 
2017  
 
6. 
Enviroguide 
Consulting 
Ltd  
 
Methane Detection 
Survey & Report 
€550 
Test gas wells 
April 
2017  
 
7. 
Fehily 
Timoney 
& 
Company  
 
Optimal Uses for 
North Kerry Landfill 
Site  
 
No 
invoice 
submitted to 
date 
Future Use of Site  
 
April 
2017  
 
8. 
The Forestry 
Company Ltd 
 
Valuation Services 
for Forestry Area 
within the Landfill 
Legal Boundary  
 
€800 
Optimal 
Uses 
Project  
 
June 
2017  
 
9. 
NeoDyne Ltd 
 
Design of Electrical 
Upgrade to North 
Kerry Landfill 
€34,200  
 
Upgrade 
existing 
electrical 
infrastructure 
for 
Cells 1 to 16 
June 
2017  
 
TOTAL
 €44,160 
 
 
With the exception of No. 7 (which relates to Expressions of Interest Process) 
and No. 9 (which relates to Health and Safety), all remaining costs relate to EPA 
Licence Condition Requirements.  
  
As licensee holder, Kerry County Council procure independent consultants to 
carry out a number reports and surveys on an annual basis across a range of 
disciplines in order to be complaint with the waste licence conditions. 
Significant expenditure is incurred year on year in order to be in compliance 
with these conditions for a period of at least 30 years post closure as per the 
EPA licence.   
  
5. The construction of any additional waste infrastructure (e.g. proposed waste 
cells) will require a new waste licence application. The landfill ceased accepting 
waste in July 2014 and is no longer (since July 2017) licenced by the EPA to 
accept waste for landfilling. Any proposed waste activity will require a licence 
from the EPA irrespective of whether planning permission is required. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
32 of 41 
 
 
“In 2015 a market sounding exercise was undertaken seeking expressions of interest 
on possible commercial options.  Due to the complexities it was necessary to engage 
consultants.  The process to appoint consultants commenced in late 2016 and they 
were appointed in April 2017.  As Kerry County Council ceased accepting waste at the 
North Kerry Landfill in July 2014 why did it take until April 2017 to engage consultants 
and when in 2015 were market soundings carried out.   
 
The expressions of interest documentation were published on November 12th and the 
closing date for receipt of submissions is December 14th.  Following this the 
consultants will prepare a report and update the Council on their findings.”   
 
Cllr. Culloty asked when will members be provided with a copy of this report and he 
further asked if planning is required for works that must be carried out.  He asked if 
consideration was given to erecting wind turbines on the site or could the bunding of 
waste from Japanese Knotweed be carried out there. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that from 2014 the first priority was the aftercare of the 
landfill and there has been considerable investment in time and resources to ensure 
the site complies with the EPA licence.  A substantial contract was recently advertised 
for the design and upgrade of the electrics at the landfill.  The landfill site is an asset 
and she believed there is potential in it for the future.  A market sounding exercise had 
to be undertaken and this takes time.  Kerry County Council is actively seeking 
expressions of interest and she hoped a viable proposal would emerge from this 
process. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated while the landfill is considered to be a valuable asset it is very 
costly.  It is almost 4 years since it was closed and it has not been utilised since then.  
While he understood there is an obligation on Kerry County Council to comply with the 
EPA Licence the annual maintenance cost is in the region of €980,000.  All options 
should have been considered before the landfill was closed.   
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that the waste industry is very unpredictable and it 
has changed a lot in the last few years.  In some instances, Emergency Orders were 
issued where landfills had not closed.  The priority for the Council must be the aftercare 
of the landfill and this work is both difficult and costly and there were environmental 
issues to be taken into consideration. 
 
Mr. J. Breen stated when the landfill was closed the last developed cell was almost 
full.  It would have cost €1m to develop a new cell and at that time the private sector 
were not bringing much waste to the landfill.  All landfills are subject to the EU Landfill 
Directive and an aftercare plan must be in place for 30 years.  The closing date for 
receipt of Expressions of Interest was Thursday 14th December and he hoped there 
would be substantial submissions.  
 
 
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
33 of 41 
 
19.    Call to ask factories to remove the restrictions on the number of 
movements for cattle 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask the Minister for Agriculture to remove the restriction on the number of 
movements for cattle. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy amended the motion as follows: 
“To ask the Minister for Agriculture to ask the factories to remove the restriction on the 
number of movements for cattle”.  He added that the movement restriction is having a 
devastating impact on farmers and there can be a price difference of up to €400. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
20. 
Improvements in the accessibility of all directives, compliance 
regulations and obligations for people with learning disabilities 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we write to the Minister for Agriculture and the Marine seeking immediate 
improvements in the accessibility of all directives, compliance regulations and 
obligations to people with learning disabilities who are working in the farming and 
fishing sector. The lack of workable reasonable accommodations and audio files has 
led to effective discrimination against those with literacy difficulties. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty advised that in October Edward Dearing was allowed present his case 
to the European Parliament and this did not reflect well on the Department of 
Agriculture and Food who had penalised Mr. Dearing because of his inability to read 
complex text.  Information should be made accessible to all levels of ability and a 
common sense approach should be taken by the Department. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald SECONDED the motion. 
 
22. 
Clarification on the implications of a person with Lymes Disease donating 
blood 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the Minister for Health seeking clarification as to what the 
implications are going forward for a person who has Lymes Disease donating Blood 
that may be used in transfusions. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg requested that the resolution would be forwarded to the Minister for 
Health. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
34 of 41 
 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton moved Notice of Motion No. 23 on behalf of Cllr. Kennelly. 
 
23. 
Availability of staff for weather warnings 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm that when any code warning of possible flooding 
arise, that all Kerry County Council staff are on standby through our emergency action 
plans. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has Emergency Response Plans for Severe Weather 
Events, including for Flooding; Snow/Ice/Frost and Wind/Storm conditions. 
These plans were prepared in accordance with guidance given by the National 
Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management.  
 
In relation to flooding, the plans identify specific actions to be carried out by 
Area staff in areas known to be at risk of flooding, having regard to the nature /  
scale of the warning received from Met Eireann and the weather forecasted 
 
These actions include preparatory works, such as inspections of critical points 
in the drainage network, making available sand bags, having pumps on standby, 
as well as having appropriately trained staff available. The Civil Defence Officer 
also arranges to have volunteers on standby dependant on the severity of the 
projected weather event.    
 
The Council received a Yellow alert from Met Eireann at 12:20 on the 21st 
November 2017.  The forecast from the Met Eireann weather charts was for 
rainfall totals of approximately 30mm over a 21hour period.      
 
The Council most frequently receive Yellow alerts and the concept behind these 
alerts is to notify those who are at risk because of their location and/or activity, 
and to allow them to take preventative action. It is implicit that YELLOW level 
weather alerts are for weather conditions that do not pose an immediate threat 
to the general population, but only to those exposed to risk by nature of their 
location and/or activity.  
 
On receipt of the alert the Council carried out inspections of the drainage 
network and removed any potential blockages. Sand bags had been distributed 
earlier in October in response to ex-Hurricane Ophelia and Storm Brian, to 
properties that had previously experienced flooding, particularly in the 
Clieveragh area in Listowel. 
 
On the morning of the 22nd November, exceptional adverse rainfall was 
experienced on the Dingle Peninsula and North Kerry, where it is estimated that 
over 32mm of rain fell within a 2hour period.  
 
The earliest calls to the emergency numbers were received at 5:30 am and crews 
were deployed to the affected areas by 6 am.   
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
35 of 41 
 
The crews were supported by 9 Civil Defence volunteers who responded to 
isolated locations affected by flood waters, in North Kerry, where there was no 
history of flooding. 
 
24.      Support for the Secure Hours-Better Future Charter 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council supports the Secure Hours-Better Future Charter which would ban 
Zero Hour Practices including the Exploitative ‘if and when’ contracts, provide workers 
with secure hour contracts which reflect weekly hours actually worked and ensure a 
maximum 12 month ‘look-back’ period to calculate hours worked and prohibit 
victimisation of workers for asserting their rights. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly moved the motion. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
25.    Call to utilize any empty wards or beds in Nursing Homes 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call upon the Department of Health to utilize any empty 
wards or beds in their facilities in places like Kenmare Community Nursing Unit and 
any Hospitals in the County.  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen advised that he understood the delay in opening the 
remaining beds in hospitals is due to recruitment issues.  He called on the HSE to 
meet with the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation and staff in an effort to resolve 
this impasse.  Ireland has an increasing elderly population and Kenmare Community 
Hospital services a large catchment area.  He asked that the resolution would be 
referred to the Minister for Health and the HSE. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
26. 
Call for a design and drainage scheme to deal with the serious flooding 
on the R551 at Buncurrig, Ballyheigue 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council design and implement a drainage system to deal with the 
serious flooding on the R551 at Buncurrig, Ballyheigue. 
 
The following reply issued: 
On the morning of the 22nd November, exceptional adverse rainfall was 
experienced on the Dingle Peninsula and North Kerry, where it is estimated that 
over 32mm of rain fell within a 2 hour period, resulting in flooding to some 
properties.   
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
36 of 41 
 
The R551 at Buncurrig is a very low lying area and drainage from this area is 
also dictated by tide levels on the seaward side of the sluice gates at Akearagh. 
The Council carries out frequent maintenance on the Akearagh drainage 
network, with specific funding provided annually in the adopted budget, and 
works had been ongoing since early November.  
 
Extensive work was also carried out in repairing the sluice gates at the mouth 
of Akearagh Lough outfall this year, ensuring that they were operating and not 
allowing tidal water back towards Buncurrig and the R551 road.   
 
The highest water levels in a river can occur some hours after a period of heavy 
rainfall, which can vary depending on the topography and size of a river 
catchment. Unfortunately, the flow in the local streams at Buncurrig coincided 
with the high tides at approximately 7am, when the sluice gates were closed, 
restricting the outflow towards the sea.   
 
Consideration could be given to raising the level of the road to maintain access 
on the R551, having regard to the overall level of funding available for road 
improvement works and other demands for such funding. There are alternative 
diversions available in such exceptional circumstances.  
 
Due to the low lying topography, it is extremely challenging to identify a 
drainage system that would address flooding from exceptional adverse 
situations as was experienced on the morning of the 22nd November.  
 
As part of a recent application made to the OPW to fund a Coastal Erosion and 
Flood Risk Management Study for the Ballyheigue-Banna-Carahanne Coastal 
Cell area, it is intended that the study (subject to funding) would also examine 
flooding issues in the Akearagh Lough area. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“For the past several years the R551 at Buncurrig Ballyheigue (a regional road) the 
main route to Tralee for many people has been flooded and closed. 
 
I have brought motions to the Listowel Municipal District and my colleague Norma 
Foley has brought motions to Tralee Municipal District.  In fairness to Kerry County 
Council they have carried out drainage works on the canals and drain on both sides 
of the road last May.  I am told that a number of the sluice gates at Ardkeragh have 
been replaced. 
 
However every time there is heavy rain the road has to be closed for a number of 
days, anything from two to four or five. 
 
I would like to know what can be done here to stop this happening.  It is totally 
unacceptable in this day and age to have this kind of regular flooding. 
 
People have had car engines damaged, people have to detour adding to their 
journey times.  It has a negative impact on commercial activity in Ballyheigue village 
where shops etc lose business. 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
37 of 41 
 
 
People living on the west side of Ballymcquinn can have their septic tanks flooded 
causing damage to new houses. 
 
The road itself will be destroyed because of the regularity of the flooding. 
 
I am asking Kerry County Council to investigate this situation and see what options 
are there to solve the issue.” 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney SECONDED the motion. 
 
27. 
Call for more apprentices 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
As the volume of construction projects increases, and there is a shortage of qualified 
tradesmen to fill these posts, I call on this Council to write to the Minister for 
Employment Affairs & Social Protection, Regina Doherty, to consider ways to make it 
more attractive for people, who wish to begin apprenticeships, to do so. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that apprentices must attend college and pay in excess 
of €700 and they should be entitled to avail of a grant.  There is huge demand for 
trades people and he called on the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social 
Protection to survey employers to establish what type of system would suit them.   
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
28.    Repair of public lights 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
I'm calling on Kerry County Council to repair lights in housing estates outside 
people's homes, as people are afraid of crime, break-ins and injuring themselves 
without it. The only bit of security people have in estates is by having a public light. 
Kerry County Council is not fixing lights in other estates in the context that they are in 
the process of being taken in charge but these people are paying Property Tax to the 
Local Authority and should be getting some return for their money. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has 12,387 public lights in our charge and the cost of 
providing this service will be over €2million in 2018. The number of lights in 
our charge and the cost of providing this service is increasing annually, with 
the taking in charge of completed housing estates. The challenges in 
providing and maintaining the public lighting network was previously 
identified in a report considered by the Operations SPC, following which a 
Public Lighting policy was developed and adopted by Council.   
 
Based on surveys of lighting faults, over 98% of the public lighting is fully 
operational and the majority of the faults to light heads are repaired within 12 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
38 of 41 
 
working days. It is acknowledged that there have been delays in repairing 
other faults, such as cabling faults, due to the age of the infrastructure.   
 
The Council will shortly be tendering for a new maintenance contract, and it is 
our intention to have this in place by early 2018. This will provide a more 
streamlined approach to public lighting maintenance and the contract will 
have control measures in place to ensure the rectification of public lighting 
faults will be dealt with in a timely manner, with penalties invoked where 
specified targets are not met. The contract will also provide for the successful 
contractor to also carry out repairs and upgrades to cabling faults.  
 
Management companies are responsible for the maintenance and energy costs 
of the public lighting in a private estate until it is taken in charge. In assessing 
an estate to be taken in charge, the Council has to be assured by the 
developer that the infrastructure (roads, footpaths, public lighting etc.) has 
been constructed in accordance with the appropriate standards and any 
repairs identified are fully addressed. The repairs are generally addressed by 
the Developer or through the bonds conditioned in the grant of planning 
permission.   
  
In recent years, Kerry County Council has made significant progress on taken 
estates in charge. Since 2014, 33 estates have been taken in charge and the 
Council is currently in the process of taking in charge a further 5 estates.   
  
There have been difficulties with public lighting in 4 of these estates and 
revised procedures have been put in place, as part of the taking in charge 
process, to ensure that such issues are addressed more promptly in future. 
These were outlined in correspondence issued to the members in relation to 
public lighting, on the 28th October 2017.   
  
It is acknowledged that there may be difficulties in addressing public lighting 
issues in private estates, particularly with older historical estates, where the 
surety from the developer is no longer in place or the developer is not trading. 
The adopted public lighting policy provides for the Council to take over the 
public lighting in such estates, in advance of the taking in charge of the estate.  
Full details of any costs involved, any funding model required for the repairs, 
and the timeframe for the works in such cases will be advised at the relevant 
Municipal District.    
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae pointed out that public lights should be repaired within 12 days of 
being reported.  However, two lights in Clarin Wood are out for 7 to 8 months while in 
another estate in Rathmore none of the lights are working.  Homeowners pay LPT 
and they are entitled to a service and this includes the repair of lights.  Cllr. Healy-
Rae PROPOSED that the Council would fix all lights regardless of whether an estate 
has been taken in charge or not. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
39 of 41 
 
29. 
Management, maintenance and operation of Water Treatment Plants 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council who is responsible for the management, maintenance 
and operation of Water Treatment Plants throughout the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Irish Water are responsible for the management, maintenance and operation of 
Water Treatment Plants throughout Kerry and are the owners of all the plants.  
 
The Water Services (No. 2) Act, 2013 makes further provision for the 
performance of certain functions by Local Authorities on behalf of Irish Water. 
A Service Level Agreement was signed between Kerry County Council and 
Irish Water which took effect on 1st January 2014 and the term of the 
Agreement is for a period of 12 years. Section 3.4 of the Service Level 
Agreement sets out the services that Kerry County Council will provide to Irish 
Water and these include, among other things, the operation and maintenance 
of Water Treatment Plants throughout the county.  
 
This agreement does not include the operation and maintenance of Water 
Treatment Plants by Contractors in the county through Design, Build & 
Operate (DBO) contracts, which will continue to be operated by the relevant 
contractors appointed by Irish Water. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
30.    Call to introduce a ticket system at KUH in the A&E and Outpatients 
Departments 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council request the HSE as a matter of extreme urgency to 
introduce a Ticket System at Kerry University Hospital in the A&E and Outpatients 
Departments, similar to the system that is currently being used in the Motor Tax 
Office, as it is very unfair for members of the Public, especially the old, the sick, 
those in pain and those in wheelchairs and on crutches to be left waiting in queues 
for hours at a time. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated if a ticket system was in operation patients could go for a cup of 
tea.  As it is they must queue for hours. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
Notice of Motion No. 31 was deferred to the January Meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
40 of 41 
 
17.12.11.10 Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to approve a visit to the Dingle Civic Amenity Centre by Cllrs. 
Kennelly, Beasley, Lucid and Moloney on the 9th November 2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan, at 
the Pride of Place Awards held in Letterkenny, Co. Donegal on the 2nd 
December 2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. Thornton and Grady at the 
Conference on the theme “A Practical Guide to Budget 2018” which was held 
in Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 8th to 10th December 2017. 
 
Cllr. Grady was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Connor-Scarteen at the 
Conference on the theme “Local Authorities and Regional Assemblies 
Managing Executive Governance” to be held in Galway on the 15th and 16th 
December 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Connor-Scarteen was nominated to report back to Council on this 
Conference. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. P. McCarthy, Spring, Kelleher, 
Cahill and O’Connell at the Conference on the theme “The Finance Act 2017” 
to be held in Carlingford, Co. Louth from 5th to 7th January 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Cahill was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(f) 
No member expressed an interest in attending the Conference on the theme 
“Entitlement to Health Services” to be held in Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 19th to 
21st January 2018. 
 
17.12.11.11 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 18th October 2016 from the HSE in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to the appointment of additional dentists. 
2.  
Letter dated 24th February 2017 from the HSE in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to Deer Lodge. 
 
3.  
Email dated 13th November 2017 from Deputy Michael Healy-Rae in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the Fixed Penalty Drink Driving Bill.

December Ordinary Meeting 
11th December 2017  
41 of 41 
 
4.  
Letter dated 8th November 2017 from the Department of Culture, Heritage and the 
Gaeltacht in relation to the designation of areas in County Kerry as SAC’s. 
 
5.  
Letter dated 17th November 2017 from the Department of Housing, Planning and 
Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation 
to rainwater harvesting. 
 
6.  
Letter dated 17th November 2017 from Fáilte Ireland in response to a resolution from 
Kerry County Council in relation to the potential creation of a Centre of Excellence for 
tourism education in Kerry. 
7.  
Email dated 22nd November 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Planning 
and Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in 
relation to the enactment of the relevant legislation so that applicants for the Tenant 
Purchase Scheme will no longer be required to pay water charges. 
 
8.  
Email dated 23rd November 2017 from the Department of Employment Affairs and 
Social Protection in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council asking that 
children’s allowance would be paid to all children in Second Level Education. 
 
9.  
Letter dated 27th November 2017 from the RSA in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to the next round of contract tenders for RSA 
Roadworthiness/CVRT centres. 
 
10.  
Email dated 29th November 2017 from Senator Paul Coghlan in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the Fixed Penalty Drink Driving Bill 
2017. 
 
11.  
Email dated 1st December 2017 from the Department of Education and Skills in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to Japanese Knotweed 
education in schools. 
 
12.  
Letter dated 4th December 2017 from the Department of Children and Youth Affairs in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to funding for 
playschools/pre-schools in rural areas. 
13.  
Letter dated 20th November 2017 from Carlow County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and 
the Marine to produce adequate information to ensure ease of access and 
understanding of complex requirements for persons with disabilities. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised that the Christmas Dinner would be served in the 
Porterhouse at 4.30pm. 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.20pm. 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
