www.leitrim.ie
Chief Executive Monthly
Management Report
March 2026
Prepared in accordance with
Section 136 (2) of the Local
Government Act, 2001 as inserted
by Section 51 of the Local
Government Act 2014

3 
 
FINANCE, ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE, SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES & LIBRARY SERVICES 
FINANCE  

4 
 
 

5 
 
 
CLIMATE ACTION 
 
Climate Action Plan (CAP) 
1. National Monument Service workshop on implementation of sector adaptation for the Built and 
Archaeological Heritage through actions in the Climate Action Plan (4 March 2026) 
2. Q1 Climate Action Committee Meeting (05 March 2026), minutes available.  Included a tour of the 
Junction complex and restoration journey. 
3. Application for NWRA DZ Scheme for pumps (Project Type 2, €250k, theme Adaptation) and Tree & 
Hedge Management Plan (Project Type 1, 50k, theme Green Infrastructure & Biodiversity) (6 March 
2026) 
4. Prepared a progress and plans briefing for Leitrim County Council to meet emissions reduction targets 
by 2030 for an Energy Performance Officer national event 23 March 2026 
5. SEAI Critical Success Scorecard annual review (26 March 2026).  Some progress has been made from 
the previous year, but substantial emissions reductions required to meet the 2030 target (51% 
reduction from baseline 2016-2018) 
6. Ongoing engagement with Community on bringing a climate course for over 55s to Co. Leitrim (with 
Jacinta Barrins) in September 
7. Ongoing engagement with the IKC3 Programme to build capacity in climate action among community 
and business groups in the Decarbonising Zone (April to June 2025) 
8. Support Arts on lead for application to Creative Climate fund, open until 15 April 2026.  Shared Island 
element, requirement for partnerships.  Potential €400,000 - €750,000 available 
 
Community Climate Action Programme (CCAP) Fund  
 
Biodiversity  
National Tree Week 2026: Distributed 200 native trees from the Tree Council of Ireland and Coillte to 
Community groups in Co. Leitrim.  
Biodiversity Officer Network: Attended quarterly Heritage Council Biodiversity Officer/Heritage Officer 
Network training in Kilkenny   
PEACEPLUS: Member of Evaluation Panel for EoI’s received for Community Biodiversity and 
environmental awareness projects 
Biodiversity Action Plan Scheme: Funding approved by the Heritage Council for financial assistance for 
implementation of the Co. Leitrim Biodiversity Action Plan (€20,000) 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
CCAP Phase 1 - Strand 1 & Strand 1a 
 
CCAP Phase 2 – Strand 1 
 
Climate Action continue to work with groups on 
the close out of projects from Strand 1 Phase 1 & 
Strand 1a.  The closing date for completion of 
works under Strand 1 Phase 1 & Strand 1a has had 
a blanket extension to 1 May 2026 (all projects to 
be completed). 
 
No outcome of the recommended projects 
submitted (administration Pobal on behalf of 
DCEE). 
 

6 
 
Animal Control Services  
Intake & Outcomes 
Stray Dogs 
4 
Surrendered Dogs 
10 
Seized Dogs 
3 
Equines Seized 
0 
Dogs Re-Homed 
11 
Dogs Reclaimed 
4 
Dog Deaths 
0 
Dogs Euthanised 
0 
 
Complaints, Enforcement & Licensing 
Dog Fouling Complaints 
0 
Barking Complaints 
2 
Livestock Attacks/Worrying 
0 
Dog Control & Roaming Complaints 
7 
Dog Licence Inspections 
140 
Fines Issued – Dogs 
0 
 
Animal Welfare Services 
Dogs Neutered 
4 
Neutering Vouchers Issued 
8 
Dogs Micro-Chipped 
2 
Animal Carcasses Removed 
2 
Dog Waste Station Service Visits 
57 
Dog Waste Bags Dispensed 
2000 
 
Communication & Engagement 
Newspaper Articles / Radio 
6 
School / Community Workshops 
1 
Social Media Posts 
52 
 
COMMUNITY AND INTERGATION 
 
Local Enhancement Programme 2026 
Applications for LEP 2026 closed on the 27th of February, with 142 successful applications received. Initial 
review is complete and recommendations for the LCDC Assessment Committee have been prepared. 
 
Age Friendly Programme   
Work continues with internal and external stakeholders to progress a Climate Action Course for over 55’s 
in Leitrim. Location has been selected and promotional materials finalised. Recruitment of community 
champions to support uptake has commenced. 
 
Healthy Ireland 
Expressions of interest and SLAs are being put in place with implementing partners to deliver work 
programmes in 2026. Payment of funds has commenced.  

7 
 
 
 
Love Where You Live 
The Love Where You Live Primary Schools Competition is open to all primary schools across County 
Leitrim. Schools are invited to participate by submitting a project aligned with the 2026 theme, Climate 
Action. The closing date for receipt of submissions is Friday, 24 April 2026. 
 
The Love Where You Live 2026 Community Competition will comprise six categories, as follows: 
• 
Green Community 
• 
Green Estate 
• 
Age Friendly Community 
• 
Social Inclusion 
• 
Community Achievement 
• 
Gen Z Impact Award (new for 2026) 
The call for entries for the community competition categories will open on 9 April 2026. 
 
Leitrim PEACEPLUS Action Plan (1.1) 
 
Thriving & Peaceful Communities  
• QQI Level 7 - 25 progressing with programme. Two online session & a 2-day residential on NUI 
Maynooth Campus have been completed to date and a further in person session was held in 
Drumshanbo in March. The feedback from participants has been positive to date.  
• Volunteer Support Programme – The summer camp program has now been launched; information 
sessions are planned in various venues and application process is open. Two half day barista 
training courses, fully subscribed for April in Ballinamore and May in Dromahair.  
• Virtual Reality Program Equipment – Headset apparatus fully set up with the help of IT and 
facilitator Orla Casey (ATU). Staff from Community, IT, Sports Partnership, Arts, Health and Safety 
completed a day’s training in the equipment, experience and software. 
• Digital Camps for Young People – Tender granted to Harp Media for the Technical Training Camps 
for young people scheduled to take place throughout Q3 2026.  
 
Culture Heritage and Faith 
• The 2nd event with Daniel Caldwell took place in Newtowngore Methodist Church. There was a 
strong participant turn out with excellent support from Drumreilly Active Age Group and the 
Newtowngore Community. 
 
PEACEPLUS Shannonside Peace Arena (1.4) 
• The third Project Board meeting of 2026 was held in March, with representation from SEUPB, the 
Department for Communities (NI), DRCDG and McAdam Design. 
• LCC’s PEACEPLUS Development Officer attended SEUPB Lead Partner Training on the 5th of March 
in Belfast – strengthening the relationships with SEUPB and other county councils completing 
large scale capital projects under SEUPB funding.  
• LCC completed the BREEAM data dump for McAdam Design to begin compiling and reviewing. 
• Positive feedback was received from the social media update and press release. There were 636 
views of the Youtube video, 62 Facebook likes and 658 views on Instagram. 
 
Management 

8 
 
Crowleys DFK auditors have been working on certifying our claims. Under the Council Action Plan, we have 
9 Claims up on the Jems Portal from October 2023 to December 2025. Claim periods are quarterly and our 
first 4 claims have been certified. 
• Claim 1 - €24,176.94 
• Claim 2 - €30,411.42 
• Claim 3 - €27,468.54 
• Claim 4 - €31,484.12 
We have responded to detailed queries on Claims 5,6 and 7 and are awaiting certification on these. 
 
Under the Shannonside Peace Arena there are 5 Claims on the portal from November 2024 to January 
2025.  LCC have zero expenditure for first 2 claim periods. The following claims have been certified. 
• Claim 3 - €19, 553.61  
We have responded to detailed queries on Claim 4 and are awaiting certification on these.  
 
Local Community Safety Partnership 
A Stay Safe, Stay Well event was held in Manorhamilton on 12th March 2026, providing residents with 
practical advice on home security, fire safety, wellbeing, and storm preparedness. The event was well 
attended, with positive engagement between the community and service providers, highlighting the 
value of local safety and wellbeing initiatives. 
Leitrim Local Community Development Committee 
A meeting of the Leitrim LCDC was held on 25th March 2026, at which two LEADER projects were 
approved to a total value of €25,353.51. 
Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT) 
During March, the Integration Team delivered a total of nine needs-assessment clinics, supporting 
individuals and families to access appropriate services. 
• 
Five clinics were held for Beneficiaries of Temporary Protection (BOTP). 
• 
Four clinics were delivered across IPAS Centres. 
 
The Intercultural Workers Group met once in March, featuring a presentation from the Jesuit Refugee 
Society. 
 A total of five information sessions were delivered in March which were focused on Volunteering in your 
Community, Lifelong Learning & Labour Market Session, Housing Information Session (DePaul). 
The Wellbeing Advantage Workshop Series commenced in March with its first session, “Build It to Last: 
Healthy Habits that Stick.” Delivered in partnership with LAIT and Healthy Ireland, the series incorporates 
a range of wellbeing activities, including walking and running groups as well as individual health 
assessments. 
An event was held in March to mark International Wear Red Day, featuring a community walk organised 
by the Local Authority Integration Team and Leitrim Sports Partnership, in collaboration with the local 
primary school. Members of the wider community were invited to come together, wear red, and take part 
in the initiative to “Show Racism the Red Card.” 
The event was very well attended, with a total of 151 participants joining the walk and demonstrating their 
commitment to promoting inclusion and standing against racism. 
International Women’s Day was celebrated on 6th March, with this year’s theme “Power in Her Story.” The 
event provided an opportunity to reflect on the strength, resilience, and contributions of women within 
the community. 

9 
 
A total of 11 participants attended the celebration, engaging in meaningful discussion and acknowledging 
the importance of women’s voices and experiences. 
There was 1 Offer a Home activation in March accommodating 2 people. 
 
LEITRIM SPORTS PARTNERSHIP 
 
 
• Total Participants: 1,374 (Male: 460, Female: 914) 
LIBRARY SERVICES 
 
 
 
Over the month of March all libraries were busy with the usual events such as class visits, reading groups 
and writer group meetings, English and Irish language classes, art & craft sessions, games 
afternoons/evenings, bridge club and Creative Writing for Young Adults in Dromahair Library. The Ciorcal 
Comhrá in Ballinamore library had their final night of a 20-week session come to an end in March. 
Irish Astronomy Week  
Manorhamilton Library marked Irish Astronomy Week with a hands-on introductory session on 
‘photographing the Milky Way and capturing images of the planets. The workshop drew an enthusiastic 
group of beginners and amateur stargazers eager to learn practical tips for night-sky photography. 
World Book Day  
The 5th of March marked World Book Day and witnessed many class visits to our Library branches where 
reading was promoted to children. 20 class visits from local schools in total took place during the month.  
16100
6943
Total Borrowed Library Books 
Year to Date 2026
Physical Books
E-Books
5100
2964
January 2026
Physical Books
E-Books

10 
 
Seed Swap   
Ballinamore Library hosted its first Seed Swap Event on 31st March arranged by Ballinamore Biodiversity 
and Gardening group. Participants were invited to bring seeds saved or pick up freely provided starter 
packets from the. This event was attended by experienced gardeners, and first-time growers.  
Seachtain na Gaeilge  
Seachtain na Gaeilge events took place in several branches with Tráth na gCeist activities being enjoyed 
by local schools who travelled to their local library to participate. 
The Forgotten Peterhead Men Exhibition and Lecture Series 
The launch of the commemorative exhibition and lecture, The Forgotten Peterhead Men, took place in 
Ballinamore Library on Friday, 6 March at 7.30pm. A special pre-launch reception for relatives was held at 
7.00pm, offering family members an opportunity to meet, connect, and view the exhibition in a more 
informal setting before the main event began. The evening was formally launched by Cllr. Paddy Farrell, 
Cathaoirleach of Leitrim County Council. The evening drew a strong attendance, including relatives, local 
historians and community groups. 
As part of the wider commemorative programme, a special series of lectures was also delivered to 
post-primary schools, ensuring young people had access to this important aspect of local and national 
history. This event was organised in partnership with Longford County Library and Archives, and the 
Department of Culture, Sport and Communications. This lecture series and exhibition was funded under 
Commemorative Grant Funding 2026. 
 
 

11 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, REGENERATION, SUSTAINABLE 
TRANSPORT & EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
STEM Passport for Inclusion- Maynooth University & ATU 
Follow up with Schools on students submitting their assignments to ATU during March.  Date of November 
2nd confirmed for Graduation of Leitrim Students. 
 
Dream Space Showcase 
Reminder email issued to schools in relation to Microsoft Dream Space in March, National event to take 
place in May at Microsoft HQ, Dublin. 
 
Carrick on Shannon Business Campus (Enterprise Hub) 
Meetings with BABLE GmbH and the working group continued in relation to the priming phase of the 
proposed Enterprise Hub at the Carrick-on-Shannon Business Campus. Stakeholder consultations took 
place during March, and further meetings are planned during April. 
 
Leitrim Economic Forum  
The next meeting of the Economic Forum will take place on 8th May 2026.  Work continued in the planning 
of the Leitrim Ambassadors Summit, an initiative of the Forum.  The summit is scheduled for September 
2026. 
 
Shaping Leitrim- A Place led Economic and Skills Strategy for Leitrim 2026-2035. 
Bi-weekly meetings are taking place with BABLE Smart cities as the consultation phase for the new 
strategy continues. One to one stakeholder meetings took place in March; the consultation survey was 
issued in March with a closing date of April 19th.  Economic Forum working group meetings continue to 
take place also. 
 
Global Business Network 
The meeting of the group is scheduled for 12th May 2026. 
 
Remote Working Marketing Campaign 
StoryLab were appointed consultants for the Remote Working & Croí Cónaithe social media marketing 
campaign.  Planning meetings continued during March, to determine potential case study participants for 
the video content for the campaign. 
 
DRCDG Funded Schemes 
The Clár funding scheme was announced in March and the closing date for Expression of interest is 14th 
May 2026.  Leitrim hosted the regional briefing for counties in the North and West in Carrick on Shannon 
on 26th March.  
 
The Towns and Cities Regeneration Investment Fund opened during March.  
TOURISM 
Marketing  

12 
 
The marketing campaign, continued throughout March with sustained media activity across TV, radio, 
video-on-demand and podcast platforms. Audience engagement remained strong, supported by 
additional promotional activity, including a prize giveaway on the Virgin Media Ireland AM show. Early 
performance data indicates strong reach, high visibility and positive engagement trends across all 
channels. The central call to action directed audiences to www.enjoyleitrim.ie, where businesses from 
across the county submitted special offers aimed at encouraging visits and increasing local spending. 
 
PR 
PR agency StoryLab has been appointed to deliver a 10-month PR campaign showcasing a range of stories 
and successes from across County Leitrim. The campaign aims to secure strong national and international 
media exposure throughout the period. 
 
Support Initiatives 
Twenty-five Festival and Event applications were received through the joint Arts, Community and Tourism 
Initiative. 
➢ Arts – 6 
➢ Community – 12 
➢ Tourism - 7 
 
An evaluation of the Community and Tourism applications funded through the GMA was completed. Arts 
grants are funded directly through the Arts Programme, and the Fleadh was supported through a separate 
allocation. In addition, a further five tourism festivals received funding through the Fáilte Ireland Regional 
Festival Scheme. 
 
Ballinamore 
Carrick on Shannon 
Manorhamilton 
Community 
Tourism 
Community 
Tourism 
Community 
Tourism 
5 
3 
4 
1 
3 
2 
 
As funding in the Carrick-on-Shannon and Manorhamilton MD areas was not fully allocated, a second call 
for applications will be made later in the year. 
 
Tourist office  
The Carrick on Shannon Tourist Office has reopened for the season and will operate six days a week, 
Monday to Saturday. Information points at Ireland West Airport, Manorhamilton, Ballinamore and Glencar 
continue to be supported. 
 
Meetings  
A meeting of the Fáilte Ireland DEDP (Destination Experience Development Plan) working group took place 
to review progress and report on the status of actions arising from the plan. Leitrim County Council 
continues to work with Fáilte Ireland and other stakeholders to advance and deliver the actions identified. 
 
LOCAL ENTERPRISE OFFICE (LEO) 
Training, Mentoring & Export      
A number of people received training in March as we ran a series of courses such as AI Training, Cap Cut 
Training, enhancing social media with AI Insights, Lean to Smarter Solutions, Sustainable Enterprise 
Development for SMEs,  How to Develop a Winning Business Plan and a Marketing Advice Clinic.  

13 
 
Demand for one-to-one mentoring continues to remain high. Assistance is also available on Export related 
issues and can be booked online free of charge to discuss any issues facing businesses or identifying and 
managing opportunities available for exporting.  
 
All In A Day’s Work Programmes & Associated Financial Supports 
The “All In a Day’s Work” campaign continues to be rolled out on the areas of Lean, Green and Digital 
supports.  There is significant growth in demand for all three supports, in particular the Energy Efficiency 
Grant (EEG) and Grow Digital (GD) Voucher.   The EEG, with up to 75% of eligible costs up to a maximum 
grant of €10,000 can be supported following the completion of a Green for Business, Green Start or a 
SEAI Energy Audit.   The GD voucher is a grant covering 50% of eligible costs (minimum grant of €500 up 
to a maximum grant of €5,000) limited to new software subscriptions for a period of 12 and training and 
configuration of the software. 
Atlantic Economic Corridor Update:  
Interreg Europe Digital Rural: Leitrim continues its partnership under Interreg Europe. The Digital Rural 
Project empowers rural communities through smart technologies and collaborative policymaking to 
foster sustainable regional development.  
 
PEACE Plus – DS3 Project 
Workshops and clinics with the Mobile Fab Lab are ongoing under the DS3 Project under PEACE Plus 
(Smart Towns & Villages). The project will run until July 2028 and offers free digital mentoring, skills 
development and community-focused digital inclusion activities. This programme is offered to SMEs, 
micro businesses, community/voluntary groups and individuals located in rural towns and villages. 
Schools can also avail of workshops with the mobile labs. 
 
Creative Heartlands 
The programme ‘Creative Heartlands on Screen’ continues with training and mentoring for the screen 
sector in Leitrim, Sligo and Roscommon with funding from Screen Ireland. A comprehensive mentorship 
programme has been established. Partnership with Creative Skillsnet continues and is entering its third 
year.  
 
Northwest Regional Enterprise Plan Implementation 
 
Northwest Vision Development 
The 3 Chief Executives from Leitrim/Sligo/Donegal are collaborating to develop a Northwest Region Vision 
which will feed into the REP development in 2026. Leitrim CoCo is represented on the project by Director 
of Economic Development and the NW REP Programme Manager.  A presentation from the consultants 
OCO was made to group in late January.  The draft document was considered by the group and further 
feedback given to the consultants.  A revised document is expected in April.   
 
Energy working group 
A multi-agency supported project is underway which will explore the opportunities available to both the 
Northwest and West Regions with available unused energy from our renewable energy sources e.g. 
onshore wind energy. Opportunities being explored are green energy parks, marketing, hydrogen etc. 
Leitrim CoCo is represented on the project by Director of Economic Development and the NW REP 
Programme Manager. A presentation on the report was made to the CEs and Directors of Economic 
Development across the four sponsoring counties, Donegal, Leitrim, Sligo and Mayo on 25th March by 
consultants on the project, GDG Consulting.  A presentation of the report is hoped to be made to the 
steering committee in April where next steps on hosting regional/online seminars will be discussed.  

14 
 
 
10xNW 2026 
The Northwest Region came together to host the 10xNW entrepreneurship exchange in February 2026 in 
Leitrim. After a very successful event the11 entrepreneurs and mentors continue to engage with each 
other throughout March as part of the commitment under the programme.  
 
Next REP development 
Currently DETE are undergoing a review of the REPs with the intention of taking recommendations from 
the review towards the next REP development which is due to kick off Q2 2026. 
 
ROADS 
 
Annual Area Programme 2026 
• Road Crews continuing to carry out routine maintenance works. 
• Road Crews carrying out Winter Maintenance Works as necessary 
 
Preparations are underway for the commencement of works under the Annual Area Programme of Works 
2026. 
N4 Carrick-on-Shannon Bypass & Traffic Management Project 
The N4 Carrick-on-Shannon Bypass & Traffic Management Project is progressing as follows: 
• 
Phase 3 – Design and Environmental Evaluation is ongoing. 
• 
The Phase 3 Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) is currently being updated based on 
comments from TII & Legal review 
• 
Ground investigation fieldwork has been completed on-site in the Material Deposition/Reuse Area 
located east of the River Shannon. 
• 
The River Shannon Bridge is under final design with input from specialist bridge architects 
• 
The Preliminary Business Case and associated Cost Benefit Analysis is currently under final update 
• 
The Draft CPO/PRO deposit maps and schedule have been prepared and are under review 
• 
All phase 3 surveys such as Ground Investigation, Topographical, archaeological, ecological etc. 
are now complete on site   
 
Pavement Overlays 
• 
N16 Pavement Overlay Scheme (POS) - Manorhamilton to Cornacloy Phase 1 – This POS Scheme 
was completed in 2023, and final Retention has now been paid to the Contractor. A small section of 
the pavement scheme in Manorhamilton was excluded and is to be completed under the 
Manorhamilton Safe Routes to School Programme.   
• 
N16 Pavement Overlay Scheme (POS) - Manorhamilton to Cornacloy Phase 2 – This POS 
commenced in November 2024, and works are now substantially completed. Final Retention payment 
is being processed.  
• 
N4 Pavement Overlay Scheme – Carrick on Shannon – Consultants are currently working on the 
design and tender documents for this Pavement Overlay Scheme.  This Pavement Overlay Scheme 
overlaps with the N4 Carrick on Shannon Road Safety Improvement Scheme currently under 
development. It is anticipated that both schemes will be completed in two phases, with the first phase 
incorporating a Pavement scheme to be completed in 2026 with the second phase incorporating the 
remaining pavement and safety scheme in 2027. Tender documents for Phase 1 are complete and will 
go to tender mid-April 2026.  

15 
 
• 
N16 Pavement Overlay Scheme - Stradrine to Esky Bridge – Consultants RoadPlan have 
commenced development of the pavement strengthening and reinstatement proposals, 
topographical survey has been completed. It is anticipated that the scheme will be completed in two 
phases, one of which will overlap with the N16 Glenfarne VRU improvements. 
  
Realignment of N16 
N16 Lissingroagh to Kilmakerril - Leitrim County Council submitted a Project Information Summary 
Notice (PISN) & Estimated Total Scheme Budget Sheet to the TII for this proposed minor works scheme. 
 
N16 HD17 Road Safety Inspections – Works include: 
• 
N15 Tullaghan Traffic Calming – A revised preliminary design has been submitted to TII and has been 
approved.  The Road Design Office is in consultation with the Planning Department regarding Part 8 
Planning Approval and consultation is also required with the TII prior to Part 8 Advertisement. 
• 
N16 Glenfarne VRU improvements – Consultants RoadPlan have commenced development of the 
proposals for the safety scheme in conjunction with the N16 Stradrine to Esky Bridge Pavement 
Overlay Scheme. 
 
HD15 Road Safety Improvements N4 – Roundabouts on N4 (Shannon Lodge 
Roundabout to end of Speed Limits) 
N4 Carrick on Shannon Road Safety Improvement Scheme – This Scheme has been approved by the 
TII, Road design are working with TII safety section to appoint consultants for development of this safety 
scheme in conjunction with the N4 Carrick on Shannon Pavement Overlay Scheme. 
  
Leitrim Greenways & Active Travel Severance Scheme 
The N16 Manorhamilton VRU Improvement scheme - Topographical survey completed in 2024 & 
Traffic survey completed. Leitrim County Council developed a Feasibility and Options Report for 
submission to TII but there is no allocation for 2026.    
  
Bridge Rehabilitation Programme 
• Shesknan Bridge Emergency Works – Bridge Failure at Shesknan in North Leitrim with Local Road L-
6100-0 closed to through traffic. Consultancy contract extended to assess and recommend bridge 
design options while Leitrim County Council develop funding options with the Department. 
Topographical surveying complete, ecological screening complete and under review, procurement of 
ground investigation works is in progress.  
• De-Vegetation Contract on 18 No. Bridges – This contract has been completed for the de-vegetation 
of 18 Bridges around the County in preparation for the 2026 Bridge Rehabilitation Programme.  
• Ecological Surveys – Quotations received for surveying of 18 bridges; appointment of the successful 
candidate is in progress.  
• Rehabilitation Contracts – Construction stage tendering has commenced for the bridge 
rehabilitation works, currently invitations to tender have been sent to 7 contractors for 2 bridges.  
• Bridge Inventory and Maintenance Inspections – Bridge surveys, inspections and inventory updates 
are ongoing, currently 50 bridges have been surveyed for 2026.  
 
Specific Improvement Grants – Works include: 

16 
 
• R289 Kilcoon – Design Consultant appointed. Report on Options approved by Department. Ground 
Investigations and Topographical survey complete. Detailed design and tender documents 
complete. Landowner negotiations ongoing and at an advanced stage. It is anticipated that 
construction stage tendering will commence in late April 2026 subject to completion of the land 
acquisition agreements.  
• R280 Killarga – Design Consultant appointed. Topographical surveying and Ground Investigations 
complete. Options Report complete and approved by the Department. Draft Part 8 documents 
complete. Detailed design process almost complete. Land acquisition negotiations with landowner 
ongoing. 
• R280 Loughmurran Realignment – A new consultant engineer has been appointed for the scheme 
and is developing initial stages. 
• R278 Junctions – Proposed Land take drawings issued to Area office for agreement with landowners. 
• R280 Erriff Retaining wall Rehabilitation – Design Consultant appointed, Topographical survey 
complete, De-vegetation of Retaining Wall complete, Bat survey completed. Ground investigation 
works retendered with appointment of successful candidate in progress. Landowner negotiations 
ongoing. 
 
Local Improvement Schemes (LIS) 
The 2026 LIS allocation of €434,040 has been received. The LIS list has been updated, currently there are 
121 people on this list. Letters of offer based on our allocation have been issued to 8 applicants.  
 
Roads in Charge (RIC) Queries 
Processed This Month 
Processed Year To Date 
28 
72 
All queries regarding water and wastewater services are now processed by Uisce Eireann. 
 
Abnormal Load Permits 
Permits Processed This month 
Permits Issued Year to Date 
 00 
06 
 
Hedge Cutting Grant Scheme 
2025/2026 
The closing date for the Hedge Cutting 
Grant Scheme 2025/2026 was Friday 30th 
January 2026.  A total of 89 Applications 
were received. 
 
• Previous/Repeat Applicants 81 
• New Applicants 
 
08 
 
Draft Parking Control (Pay Parking) Bye-Laws 2026  
The Draft Parking Control (Pay Parking) Bye-Laws 2026 in respect of the Town of Carrick on Shannon, Co. 
Leitrim were published in March 2026 and are available for public inspection from 18th March 2026 to 14th 
April 2026 inclusive.  Representations in relation to these Draft Bye Laws may be made up to Tuesday 28th 
April 2026. 
ACTIVE TRAVEL 
 
Active Travel Schemes currently under construction by direct labour and will be completed in Q2/2026: 
25
35
40
Hedge Cutting Grants by MD (%)
Carrick on Shannon
Ballinamore
Manorhamilton

17 
 
• Aughnasheelin Active Travel Link  
• Pedestrian Crossing – Hilly Road, Drumshanbo 
 
Currently at Part 8 Planning stage: 
• Drumshanbo – Town Junction upgrade advertised submissions due 20/04/2026 
• Carrick on Shannon – Attifinlay Roundabout to Summerhill Active Travel Scheme advertised 
submissions due 15/05/2026. 
 
Currently at Preliminary and detailed Design Stage in house: 
• Castlecara Pedestrian Crossing  
• Carrigallen Active Travel Link and additional Permeability Link  
 
Design and Part 8/Section 38 Planning are required for the following when resources allow: 
• Ballynamony R280 AT Scheme  
• Manorhamilton – Park Road Upgrade  
• Ballinamore Junction Upgrade  
 
Safe Route to Schools 
Under construction by Contractor to be completed Q2/2026 
Mohill Community College 
Contractor to be appointed 
St. Clare’s NS, Manorhamilton 
Awaiting NTA Design Team Feedback 
SRTS Rd 3 – Drumeela NS  
Design underway and Part 8 necessary  
SRTS Rd 3 – Ballinamore Scoill Chlann 
Naofa  
Delivery Plan received and Design ongoing 
SRTS Rd 3 – Drumshanbo VS  
 
Awaiting Delivery Plan for the following from An Taisce: 
 
SRTS Rd 4 – Scoil Mhuire Naofa 
(Carrigallen NS) - €20,000 
SRTS Rd 4 – St. Patrick’s NS, 
Drumshanbo - €20,000 
 
 
 
Bus Stop Enhancement Programme 
An Allocation of €500,000 has been received for the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme for 2026. 
o Currently at construction by Contractor: 
o Kinlough  
o Currently at Section 38 stage: 
o Ballinamore – 1 no. Bus Shelters 
o Bus Shelters identified for progression in 2026 at following locations: 
o Mohill, Leitrim Village and Acres Lake, Drumshanbo. 
o Bus Pole and Cage upgrades identified for progression in 2026 at following locations: 
o Roosky, Dromod, Kinlough, Jamestown and Dromahaire. 
 
CAPITAL PROJECTS 
Carrick on Shannon Flood Relief Scheme  
A legal review is currently underway for the first draft of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAR).  
 
Leitrim Village Flood Relief Scheme  

18 
 
Substantial progress has been made on the approach to compiling a business case for the scheme.  Full 
details of the project are available on website www.leitrimvillagefrs.ie. 
   
Mohill Flood Relief Scheme  
The hydraulic analysis and economic feasibility on this project have been substantially complete in Mohill 
by OPW in partnership with LCC Capital Projects Office. We await OPW’s determination, following  a 
business case submitted to them in September 2024. OPW have mentioned that may fall under the Minor 
Works Scheme, before Scheme progressing to Planning Consent & Construction. 
 
OPW Minor Flood Schemes 
Dromahair Scheme  
Project went to tender in March 2026.  Tender assessment will take place in April 2026.  Approval will be 
requested from OPW in order to commence construction of the scheme in June 2026 
 
Leitrim Village (Keadue Road Scheme) Scheme  
The Minor works scheme is substantially complete. 
 
Manorhamilton Minor Works Scheme  
This Minor works scheme is substantially complete.  
 
Carrick on Shannon Urban Regeneration Scheme 
A Substantial completion has been issued for the Lighting Contact for the Linear Park Marina and the 
pedestrian bridge on the N4, Defects to be completed be the contractor.  
 
Manorhamilton Public Realm Scheme 
Contract No 1 for public realm works on Main Street has been completed. Works on Contract No 2 for the 
realignment of the access road to Enterprise lands off Park Road is underway on site. 
 
Mohill Public Realm Scheme  
Works have been completed. A Substantial Completion Certificate has been issued to the Contractor.  
 
Drumshanbo ExChange.  
The Department have confirmed additional funding for the scheme. A Contractor has been appointed 
and is due to commence works in mid April 2026 with completion of the project approximately Q4 2027. 
 
Drumshanbo Food Innovation & Knowledge Hub   
Collins Boyd Engineering Ltd have been appointed by Leitrim Food Enterprise Zone CLG as their Design 
Team for the Scheme. They are currently preparing a planning application for Phase 2 of this development 
with detailed design to follow. 
 
Shannonside Recreational Campus 
Construction Tender to be published by end of April. Tender documents are currently under review by 
SEUPB. Works to commence on site Q3 2026. 
 
Carrick Arts and Community Centre (Colemans Building along Main Street) 
Works are now nearing completion. Lower Ground Floor Works (Towns & Villages) are to be completed by 
30th April. Upper Ground Floor and remainder of building to be completed by end of May.   

19 
 
 
Manorhamilton NCYS Building   
Works are now complete. North Connacht Youth & Community Services (NCYCS) are to commence 
occupancy of building before end of April.  
 
Leitrim Village Community Facility  
Further information requested in relation to the planning application has now been submitted to the 
Planning Authority by Davitt Plan and Design & Associates and a decision is pending. 
 
SLNCR Greenway – Sligo to Enniskillen  
Funding is now in place via Shared Island fund (50%) and DFI  (50%) for service contracts & PLO services 
in Fermanagh.  Phase 2 deliverables and reports are now uploaded to the SLNCR dedicated web site. Full 
details on web site www.slncr-greenway.com and key milestones achieved with infographic of 
information. Phase 3 Design & Environmental Phase is ongoing.  The PLO’s are meeting 
Landowner/Property owners on an ongoing basis discussing the Emerging Preferred Route (EPR). This 
work will continue in 2026. LiDAR/Drone Surveys (ROI) completed and data processed. Topographical 
&Hydrographical Surveys (ROI only) currently ongoing and 85% survey completed from Blacklion to 
Dromahair. Survey works in ROI to continue to end June 2026. Consultants now working on optioneering 
the best fit route to be located within the Preferred Corridor in 2026 and environmental surveys will 
continue so as to aid in the draft of the EIAR. 
 
Carrick on Shannon to Battlebridge Blueway   
The consultants have to carry out further Aquatic surveys as per IFI Scoping response Opinion from An 
Coimisiún Pleanála submission. All other Environmental surveys are to be completed to keep surveys up 
to date for the Planning submission. PLO working with Landowners and Lisney Agronomists and 
Landowners Land valuers to get Voluntary land Acquisition agreement in place before submission to the 
Bord. They are also advancing the EIAR with a view that a Planning application will be lodged to An 
Coimisiún Pleanála at the end of November 2026, once a final Legal Review is complete 
 
South Leitrim Greenway  
TII formally approved Phase 0 and gave approval to move into Phase 1 Concept & Feasibility stage and to 
use TII Framework – Technical Consultancy Framework For Greenways and Active Travel Lot 1 (Ref: TII 
349) . TII gave approval for Phase 1 and Phase 2 which aligns with Cavan County Council TII approval for 
the Cavan Greenway project. LCC working on Tender documents for the appointment of a Consultant 
Engineer. Tender documents to be uploaded to E-Tenders by end April 2026. 
 
Hartley Bridge 
The tender assessment is now complete.  Recommendation to award the contract has been sent to the 
Department Inspector for approval.  Plan to be on site in May 2026.  
 
Dromod Roosky Greyway  
The Scheme is currently at Tender Stage with closing date for tenders due in Mid-April 2026 
 
Acres Lake Facility Centre 
The contractor is currently completing the snagging of the building, and we await his certification of the 
works at which stage a substantial completion cert will then be issued.  
It would be expected that the facility will be open to the public in Q2 2026.  

20 
 
 
Narrow Gauge Trail Drumshanbo 
The trail is completed and open to the public. 
 
Fenagh Abbey Trail 
A Pre planning meeting with the National Monuments has been scheduled for the 21/04/2026 and 
following the outcome of this meeting it would be expected a planning application will be submitted for 
the scheme. 
 
Carrick on Shannon Amenity Parks upgrade 
Helena Mc Elmeel Architects have been appointed as the Design Team for the scheme.  A Working Group 
have been developing the scheme, and it would be expected that it will be submitted for planning 
consent in Q2 2026.  
 
Drumkeeran NW Stop Play and Therapy Centre 
Works are progressing steadily and will be completed in Q3. 
 
Ballinamore M.U.G.A. 
Site Investigation has been completed and design and tender package is been finalised.  It is expected that 
works will commence in Q2.   
 
Lurganboy Church of Ireland Community Centre 
Contractor had been identified but has since indicated that they no longer have the capacity to carry out 
the works.  Unfortunately only one submission was received, therefore quotations will have to be 
resought for works.   
 
Kinlough Community Garden 
Gound mounted PV System is currently being designed.  Once proposal has been received it will be 
communicated to all stakeholders where hopefully agreement will be reached.  
 
Kinlough Arroo Project  
Cat 2 RRDF funding of €572,334 was approved for the Scheme in Dec 2025. A tender for the appointment 
of a Design Team for the Scheme will be issued shortly.  
 
The Dock – Carrick on Shannon  
Part 8 Planning consent for the scheme was approved at the Carrick MD March meeting. A tender for the 
appointment of a Design Team for the Scheme has been issued with closing date 11/05/2026 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
HOUSING, PLANNING, CORPORATE SERVICES AND 
TRANSFORMATION DIRECTORATE 
 
 
HOUSING  
 
Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025-2029 
• Target over 5 years 20 units of accommodation 
• As of 31st March 2026, there was 6 No. Outputs achieved. 
• This represents a 30% completion of the overall 5-year target. 
 
Social Housing Applications & Allocations 
• 53 – Applications received for Social Housing Support 
• 302 – Social Housing Waitlist 
• 21 – New Tenancies 
 
Housing Maintenance 
Private Rented Inspection Programme 2026 
As part of its ongoing regulatory responsibilities, the Housing Department conducts annual inspections 
of private rented accommodation to ensure compliance with prescribed minimum standards. For the 
year 2026, the Department has set a target of 313. 
2026 Target for Inspection   
No. of Dwelling inspections 
completed on 31st March 2026  
% Complete on 31st March 2026 out 
of the overall target  
313 
106 
33.86% 
 
There are 106 dwellings inspected, and 108 inspections carried out to date. 
Stock Condition Surveys on Local Authority Houses 2026 
The Housing Department have an annual target to inspect 20% of the Local Authority Housing Stock. 
(*The indicative target for the number of inspections in 2026 is 250 and this may be subject to change at 
a later date).  
2026 Target for Surveys   
No. of surveys completed on 
31st March 2026  
% Complete on 31st March 2026 out 
of the overall target.   
250 
62 
24.80% 
  
Energy Efficiency  
The Energy Efficiency Retrofit Scheme is ongoing with the focus on targeting the houses with the lowest 
BER rating. In 2026, Leitrim County Council has set a target of 16 units and progress is ongoing in 
achieving that target by the end of Q4 2026. 
 

22 
 
Private House Grants 
 
At the end of February, the following table outlines the progress and status of Private House Grant 
applications, which are at various stages of completion. At the end of March, the allocation for 2026 had 
not yet been announced by the Department; however, applications continue to be assessed and 
progressed while awaiting confirmation of this year’s allocation. 
 
Housing Aid for 
Older People (HOP) 
Housing Adaptation 
for People with a 
Disability (HGD) 
Mobility Aid 
Grant (MAG) 
Number of Applications on Hand 
currently Under Assessment  
24 
21 
9 
Number of Approved Grants to Be 
Paid Following Completion and 
Final Inspection 
56 
27 
12 
Value of Approved Grants to Be 
Paid Following Completion and 
Final Inspection 
€300,001.50 
€350,353.55 
€53,739.00 
 
Housing Capital  
The Housing Capital Team continue to progress the delivery of the annual targets under ‘Delivering 
Homes, Building Communities 2025 – 2030’. Details on the social housing (new housing construction 
dwellings pipelined for delivery) are as outlined in the table below:  
2026 Pipeline Delivery Projects 
Location  
Number of Units  
Delivery Mechanism 
Newtowngore 
7 
Direct Build 
 
Sean McDermott Street 
4 
Direct Build 
Dromahair 
2 
Turnkey 
Drumkeerin 
3 
Turnkey 
Kinlough 
2 
Turnkey 
Drumshanbo 
1 
Part V 
Kinlough 
1 
Part V 
Dromod  
2 
Part V 
Total No. of Units projected for 
delivery in 2026 
22 
  
 

23 
 
   
DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
  
Further Information 
Requests Issued 
Further Information 
Responses Received 
Formal Pre-Planning 
Enquiries 
January 
8 
14 
7 
February 
17 
10 
3 
March 
13 
9 
7 
 
 
 
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
Septembe
r
Valid planning applications
21
21
26
Invalid Planning Applications
13
9
7
E-Planing Applications
16
20
24
0
5
10
15
20
25
30 Planning applications January - March 2026
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
January February March
April
May
June
July
August Septemb
er
October Novemb
er
Final Decisions
22
20
25
Retention planning permission
3
8
5
Breakdown of Planning Decisions February 2026
Final Decisions
Retention planning permission

24 
A Part 8 Public Consultation process was approved at the March Carrick-on-Shannon Municipal District 
meeting with respect to the remodeling of the existing hard-standing plaza area to the front and side of 
the Dock, Carrick-on-Shannon. The Part 8 Public Consultation processes for 2 no. Active Travel projects 
are underway - junction tightening and pedestrian priority upgrades at six locations within Drumshanbo 
and a significant scheme along the L-3412 Local Road from the Attifinlay and Shannon roundabouts to 
Summerhill in Carrick-on-Shannon.  
Forward Planning 
Variation to County Development Plan 2023-2029 
We are presently at the stage of consultation on SEA scoping with designated environmental authorities 
which issued on 25th February last. We intend to publish our draft Variation on 15th April.   
Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) 
Draft RZLT maps were published on Friday 30th January and public consultation will run until April 1st. All 
the information relating to the RZLT and the manner in which affected landowners can make 
submissions is on our website.  
Heritage 
•
Funding applications have been approved by the Heritage Council for three heritage projects: a
Heritage Public Awareness Project, a Community Holy Well Project and a Community Fieldnames Project.
Invitations to quote for both the Holy Well and Fieldnames projects have been issued to contractors.
•
A Connecting Through Heritage podcast series has been commissioned and four episodes have been
planned which will highlight Leitrim Heritage Projects.
•
A Connecting Through Heritage video series has been commissioned and three Leitrim heritage themed
videos have been planned.
•
The Creative Ireland Traditional Aran Knitting project has commenced. Workshops for the public for
both beginners and advanced knitters will start in April.
•
The Leitrim Heritage Plan 2026 – 2030 Pre-Draft Public Consultation has concluded with 9 no.
submissions from the general public. The submissions have been assessed, and the Plan is being
translated into Irish.
SIGNED BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
Signed: _________________________________ 
Date: 14th April 2026 
 Mary Quinn Deputy Chief Executive 
