 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
27th January 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings 
are regulated by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for 
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to 
maintain infection prevention and control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and 
members of the press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand 
hygiene and sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements 
as briefed at the start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the 
Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your 
microphone on mute at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 2nd December 2024 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of Special meeting held on 18th December 2024 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations (Standing Order 11.5 – Expressions of 
Congratulations to be submitted in writing by 10am, Monday 27th January 2025) 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.320Ha of Land by a Freehold Interest at Kells Business 
Park, Kells Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 6th January 2025 
 
4.2 
To consider the disposal of 0.1127Ha of Land by way of Licence at Townsparks, Kells 
Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 28th November 2024 
 
4.3 
To consider the disposal of 0.0021Ha of Land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at St Cianan's Villas, Balsaran, Duleek, Co. Meath, in accordance with 
Statutory Notice dated 30th October 2024 
 
4.4 
To consider the disposal of 0.1523Ha of Land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at Baconstown, Enfield, Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice 
dated 14th November 2024 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
  
5.1 
Transportation 
 
5.1.1 
To receive a presentation from Iarnród Éireann regarding the development 
of the Navan Rail Line 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
 
5.2 
Planning 
 
5.2.1 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report in accordance with Section 13(4)(a) 
of the Planning & Development Act, as amended, on submissions to 
Proposed Variation No. 3 to the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 
2027, and to consider making, not making or modifying the Proposed 
Variation. 
 
5.2.2 
To resolve to hold a Council Meeting on 19th February 2025 @ 2.30pm 
(hybrid) to consider the proposed material alterations and the report of the 
Chief Executive on the Draft Maynooth & Environs Joint Local Area Plan 
2025 – 2031. 
 
5.3 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.3.1 
To consider the 5 Year Communications Strategy 2024-2029 
 
5.3.2 
In accordance with Section 134A of the Local Government Act 2001, as 
amended, to adopt the Meath County Council Annual Service Delivery Plan 
2025 
 
5.3.3 
To appoint a Councillor to Boyne Valley Tourism Ltd following the election of 
former Councillor Aisling Dempsey to Dáil Éireann 
 
5.3.4 
To appoint a Councillor to the Members Forum of the East Border Region 
Ltd following the election of former Councillor Aisling Dempsey to Dáil 
Éireann 
 
5.3.5 
To appoint a Councillor to the Regional Health Forum following the election 
of former Councillor Gillian Toole to Dáil Éireann 
 
5.3.6 
To approve a nomination to Údarás na Gaeltachta for the 2025 and 2026 
period 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
“To ask Meath County Council to detail the plans and progress made towards 
securing a Homeless Hostel in Meath following the passing of a motion in 2024 and 
to update the members of the timeline ahead against the backdrop of increasing 
homelessness figures in Meath and across the the country?” 
 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Lawes 
 
“Will Meath County Council recognise a homeless persons address registered with 
“Address Point” the service that provides a fixed address for those without a fixed 
home for the purpose of their “Local Connection”? 
 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
“How many cases involving houses with defective blocks has the Council referred to 
the Department for Housing?” 
 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Lawes 
 
“I am calling on Meath County Council to instruct all their emergency 
accommodation providers to remove CCTV cameras from private areas inside their 
properties immediately”. 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"I call on the council to create an allotment and community garden strategy for East 
Meath. There is strong public demand for this initiative. This will foster food 
independence, enhance social networks, encourage community building and 
promote sustainable practices." 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
"I call on Meath County Council to adopt a rights-based ethical procurement policy. 
This policy should align with the principles outlined in the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights, the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and 
the Global Sullivan Principles (1999). By doing so, the Council can promote respect 
for human rights among the companies it engages with in its tender processes." 
 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
“To uphold the highest standards of consistency, transparency, and fairness in the 
allocation of social housing, all available housing units designated for allocation, 
should be advertised through the Choice Based Lettings (CBL) system, including all 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
one, two, three, and four-bedroom houses, except in very limited cases eg medical 
priority, transfers etc.” 
 
 
10.0   General Interest Motions 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
 
NB Please ensure mobile phones are switched off during council meeting.  
  
 
 
