 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
27th January 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Sharon Tolan 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Mike Bray, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, 
Francis Deane, Sean Drew, Yvonne Everard, Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel French, 
Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Wayne Harding, Suzanne Jamal, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Helen 
Meyer, Linda Nelson-Murray, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly, Amanda 
Smith, Alan Tobin, Emer Tóibín and Maria White. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Eddie Fennessy, Geraldine Keogan, Nick Killian, Paddy Meade, Ronan 
Moore, Maria Murphy,  and Conor Tormey. 
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Dave Boyne and Stephen McKee. 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Barry Lynch, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona 
Fallon, Pádraig Maguire. 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 2nd December 2024 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on 2nd December 2024 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor and seconded by Councillor Sarah Reilly. 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of Special meeting held on 18th December 2024 
 
The minutes of the Special meeting held on 18th December 2024 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Noel French and seconded by Councillor Carol Lennon. 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
None 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Expressions of Sympathy were extended to: 
 
Mr. Denis Lynch, Buvinda House Security on the death of his mother, Teresa Helen Lynch. 
 
Mr. Paul Kelly, Water Services on the death of his father, Don (Donald) Kelly. 
 
Ms. Assumpta Hubble, Library Service on the death of her mother, Frances Brogan. 
 
Ms. Maura Daly, Housing on the death of her mother, Niamh Daly former Councillor of Kells UDC. 
 
Ms. Wendy Bagnall, Planning on the death of her father, Thomas (Tom) Moffett. 
 
Ms. Yvonne Morrisson, Library Service on the death of her mother, Mary Morrisson. 
 
Ms. Rosemary Corr, Housing on the death of her mother, Margaret Corr. 
 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.320Ha of Land by a Freehold Interest at Kells Business 
Park, Kells Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 6th January, 2025 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 6th January, 2025 under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Sean Drew. 
 
4.2 
To consider the disposal of 0.1127Ha of Land by way of Licence at Townsparks, Kells 
Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 28th November, 2024 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 28th November, 2024 under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Sean Drew and seconded by Councillor Sarah Reilly. 
 
4.3 
To consider the disposal of 0.0021Ha of Land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at St Cianan's Villas, Balsaran, Duleek, Co. Meath, in accordance with 
Statutory Notice dated 30th October, 2024 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 30th October, 2024 under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Wayne Harding and seconded by Councillor Noel French. 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
4.4 
To consider the disposal of 0.1523Ha of Land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at Baconstown, Enfield, Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice 
dated 14th November, 2024 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 14th November, 2024 under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Joe Fox and seconded by Councillor Noel French. 
 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
  
5.1 
Transportation 
 
5.1.1 
To receive a presentation from Iarnród Éireann regarding the development 
of the Navan Rail Line 
The Chief Executive welcomed the representatives from Iarnrod Eireann, Mr. Paul Hendrick, Director 
of Capital Investment, Mr. Alan Lord, Director of Development and Design, Capital Investment and 
Mr. Senan Moynihan, Programme Manager, Capital Investment.  He noted that the delivery of the 
Navan Rail Line was critical for the future development of County Meath. 
 
The Elected Members received a presentation on the development of Navan Rail Line.  Key 
developments in relation to population growth and climate change were noted.  In addition, draft 
objectives for the Scheme were outlined including the development of high-capacity, efficient public 
transport links between Meath and the Dublin Metropolitan Area from M3 Parkway to Navan.  The 
anticipated date of Q4 2026 for the preferred route approval, in principle, was noted. 
 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Wayne Harding; Alan Tobin; Noel French; 
Brian Fitzgerald; Gerry O’Connor; David Gilroy; Maria Murphy; Linda Nelson-Murray; Mike Bray; 
Emer Tóibín; Yemi Adenuga; Joe Bonner; Sean Drew; Nick Killian; Ronan Moore; Yemi Adenuga 
and An Cathaoirleach.  Queries raised included proposed costs, timeline for delivery, impact on 
County Development Plan, process for route selection, engagement with Elected Members, 
passenger capacities, car-parking arrangements and fare structures.  Responses to queries raised 
were provided by Mr. Senan Moynihan and Mr. Paul Hendrick. 
 
 
5.2 
Planning 
 
5.2.1 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report in accordance with Section 13(4)(a) 
of the Planning & Development Act, as amended, on submissions to 
Proposed Variation No. 3 to the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 
2027, and to consider making, not making or modifying the Proposed 
Variation. 
 
Mr. Alan Russell, Senior Planner outlined the salient details of the Chief Executive’s Report in 
accordance with Section 13(4)(a) of the Planning & Development Act, as amended, on submissions 
to Proposed Variation No. 3 to the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 2027.  The process to 
date was and the role of the Elected Members were noted. 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Noel French, seconded by Councillor Joe Fox and unanimously agreed 
by the Elected Members, it was resolved to make the proposed Variation No. 3 to the Meath County 
Development Plan 2021 – 2027. 
 
5.2.2 
To resolve to hold a Council Meeting on 19th February 2025 @ 2.30pm 
(hybrid) to consider the proposed material alterations and the report of the 
Chief Executive on the Draft Maynooth & Environs Joint Local Area Plan 
2025 – 2031. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Joe Fox, seconded by Councillor Gerry O’Connor and unanimously 
agreed by the Elected Members, it was resolved to hold an ordinary meeting of the Council on 19th 
February 2025 at 2.30pm (hybrid) to consider the proposed material alterations and the report of 
the Chief Executive on the Draft Maynooth & Environs Joint Local Area Plan 2025 – 2031. 
 
 
5.3 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.3.1 
To consider the 5 Year Communications Strategy 2024-2029 
Ms. Ailish Shaw, Communications Manager, outlined the salient details of the proposed 
Communications Strategy 2024 – 2029, including the communication objectives, communications 
resources and performance measurement. 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Wayne Harding; Ronan Moore; Nick Killian; David 
Gilroy; Yemi Adenuga; Brian Fitzgerald; Sarah Reilly; Alan Tobin; Gerry O’Connor; Emer Tóibín and 
An Cathaoirleach.  The members welcomed the strategy and acknowledged the high level of 
communication within the Council.  In addition, suggestions for calendar of events and a photo bank 
facility for Elected Members were noted. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Joe Bonner, seconded by Councillor Sarah Reilly and unanimously 
agreed by the Elected Members, the Meath County Council Communications Strategy 2024 – 2029 
was approved. 
 
5.3.2 
In accordance with Section 134A of the Local Government Act 2001, as 
amended, to adopt the Meath County Council Annual Service Delivery Plan 
2025 
 
Mr. Des Foley, Director of Services outlined the salient details of the Annual Service Delivery Plan. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Wayne Harding and 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members, the Meath County Council Annual Service Delivery 
Plan 2025 was adopted. 
 
 
5.3.3 
To appoint a Councillor to Boyne Valley Tourism Ltd following the election of 
former Councillor Aisling Dempsey to Dáil Éireann 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Wayne Harding, seconded by Councillor Sean Drew and unanimously 
agreed by the Elected Members, Councillor Paul O’Rourke was appointed to Boyne Valley Tourism 
Ltd. 
 
5.3.4 
To appoint a Councillor to the Members Forum of the East Border Region 
Ltd following the election of former Councillor Aisling Dempsey to Dáil 
Éireann 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Wayne Harding, seconded by Councillor Padraig Coffey and 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members, Councillor Paul O’Rourke was appointed to the East 
Border Region Ltd. 
 
5.3.5 
To appoint a Councillor to the Regional Health Forum following the election 
of former Councillor Gillian Toole to Dáil Éireann 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Brian Fitzgerald, seconded by Councillor Francis Deane and 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members, Councillor Yvonne Everard was appointed to the 
Regional Health Forum. 
 
5.3.6 
To approve a nomination to Údarás na Gaeltachta for the 2025 and 2026 
period 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly, seconded by Councillor David Gilroy and unanimously 
agreed by the Elected Members, Mr. Cathal Joyce/Mr. Cathal Seoige was appointed to Údarás na 
Gaeltachta. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
The Chief Executive provided details on the Council’s response to Storm Éowyn as well as the 
humanitarian response of the Local Co-Ordination Group.  The Elected Members thanked the staff of 
Meath County Council and the wider Meath Community for their response during the recent Storm. 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian; Helen Meyer; Wayne Harding; Sarah Reilly; 
Sean Drew; Mike Bray; Michael Gallagher; Carol Lennon; David Gilroy; Alan Lawes; Maria White; 
Noel French; Paddy Meade; Fionnan Blake; Brian Fitzgerald; Alan Tobin; Maria Murphy; Emer 
Tóibín and Padraig Coffey.  Matters raised included: 
 
Housing: 
Aylesbury development, affordable housing, adaptable dwellings, housing 
inspections, emergency accommodation standards, tenant-in-situ scheme;  
 
Planning: 
 
Enforcement timelines, settlement capacity audit;  
 
Community: 
 
Ashbourne Skate Park, community integration;  
 
Storm Response: 
Water locations, boil water notice, power restoration timeframes and 
communications, tree-felling; 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Transport: 
Winter gritting, revised speed limits. 
 
Responses to queries raised were provided by Ms. Fiona Fallon; Mr. Padraig Maguire, Mr. Barry 
Lynch and Mr. Martin Murray. 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday, January 17, to review the draft 
agenda and arrangements for the February Council Meeting. She noted that the members had 
received an update on the Communications Strategy and the Annual Service Delivery Plan and that 
travel arrangements for the St. Patrick’s Day period were agreed.  It was further noted that the 
reports of the Economic Development, Enterprise, Tourism, EU Affairs and Rural Regeneration SPC 
of 12th December 2024 were received.  In addition, the work programmes of the Housing and 
Integration SPC and the Community, Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC were approved 
and these will be uploaded to the documents library in Decision Time.  Finally, it was noted that the 
Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
None 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“To ask Meath County Council to detail the plans and progress made towards 
securing a Homeless Hostel in Meath following the passing of a motion in 2024 and 
to update the members of the timeline ahead against the backdrop of increasing 
homelessness figures in Meath and across the the country?” 
 
Response 
 
In accordance with the Mid-East Region Homelessness Action Plan 2024 – 2026, 
the Council is committed to delivering a Short Term Accommodation (STA) Facility 
in the County.  Several options have been explored to date and discussions are 
ongoing. The Housing Authority will continue to explore all avenues in the 
provision of an STA. In addition, the Council is seeking expressions of interest from 
land owners and developers who may wish to express an interest in selling 
property or land which may be suitable for Social, Affordable or Emergency 
Accommodation to Meath County Council. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Lawes 
 
“Will Meath County Council recognise a homeless persons address registered with 
“Address Point” the service that provides a fixed address for those without a fixed 
home for the purpose of their “Local Connection”? 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
                            Response 
 
In accordance with Meath County Council’s Allocation Scheme, a PO. Box or  
Address Point does not establish a local connection. A local connection may be 
established by living and working independently in the Local Authority area. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
“How many cases involving houses with defective blocks has the Council referred to 
the Department for Housing?” 
 
Response 
 
Meath County Council has forwarded two possible cases of defective blocks (East 
Meath) to the department. The Housing Agency has appointed the TA Group from 
their Capital Works Management Framework panel to assist the Housing Agency 
in their investigations and consultations. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Lawes 
 
“I am calling on Meath County Council to instruct all their emergency 
accommodation providers to remove CCTV cameras from private areas inside their 
properties immediately”. 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
 
The installation, operation and the determination as to the purpose and means of 
the processing of CCTV, within or around an emergency accommodation (EA) 
Centre, is a matter for the owner or service provider of the premises, who is a 
Data Controller as defined in the GDPR. 
 
The Data Protection Commission (DPC) has produced a useful guidance document 
with regard to CCTV. It can be found by searching for “CCTV guidance” in the DPC’s 
website - www.dataprotection.ie - or by clicking on CCTV Guidance Data 
Controllers_November 2023 EN.pdf.  While the determination of the purpose and 
means of the processing is entirely a matter for the service provider, as the data 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
controller, Meath County Council has circulated this guidance to the EA providers 
and highlighted some pertinent points provided in this guidance including the 
importance of: 
 
· 
Proportionality when assessing the impact of CCTV recording on 
individual’s expectation of privacy; 
 
· 
Using Data Protection Impact Assessment to determine the risks and possible 
mitigation measures regarding such issues such as the extent to which children 
or young people are present and the avoidance of placing cameras in areas 
where people have greater expectations of privacy; and 
 
· 
Being transparent and provide adequate information for those in Emergency 
Accommodation. 
 
As Meath County Council has no role in relation to CCTV in or around EA centres, 
any concerns or complaints that individuals have regarding CCTV in EA centres 
should be raised directly with the service provider or referred directly to the Data 
Protection Commissioner’s office. 
 
Councillor Alan Lawes introduced the motion.  Councillor Ronan Moore queried the point of law 
and the response by the Council was noted. 
 
The Elected members agreed to the Motion, together with the supporting information, on the 
proposal of Councillor Alan Lawes and seconded by Councillor Maria White. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"I call on the council to create an allotment and community garden strategy for East 
Meath. There is strong public demand for this initiative. This will foster food 
independence, enhance social networks, encourage community building and 
promote sustainable practices." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
As part of Meath County Council’s Climate Action Plan, the Council has 
commenced a ‘Let’s Grow’ series of events to train community groups to 
grow food, promoting awareness of eco-friendly food sourcing, composting 
and creation of sustainable gardens. If the motion is agreed the matter will 
be referred to the Climate Action, Environment and Emergency Services SPC 
for further consideration. 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion and acknowledged the Council’s response.  
The Motion, together with supporting information was agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Maria White. 
 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
"I call on Meath County Council to adopt a rights-based ethical procurement policy. 
This policy should align with the principles outlined in the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights, the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and 
the Global Sullivan Principles (1999). By doing so, the Council can promote respect 
for human rights among the companies it engages with in its tender processes." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
In accordance with the Public Sector Directive 2014/24/EU on Public 
Procurement, National Guidelines from the OGP and Department Circulars, 
Meath County Council fulfils its obligations pertaining to the details set out in the 
notice of motion, by the inclusion of Article 57 declarations and by the use of the 
European Single Procurement Document (ESPD) for all EU threshold tenders. 
Article 57 declarations and ESPD are a list of questions that potential suppliers 
have to answer, to provide a self-declaration that none of the exclusion grounds 
has been breached, and that they meet the required selection criteria. All Office 
of Government Procurement (OGP) and Local Government Operational 
Procurement Centre (LGOPC) central procurement arrangements, in use within 
the Council, benefit from the inclusion of these declarations, at the initial 
procurement stage. The Council’s current Procurement Policy includes a section 
on Social Considerations which includes social considerations in Public 
Procurement, where feasible, in order to support social policies in relation to 
employment opportunities, compliance with social and labour rights, social 
inclusion, equal opportunities and accessibility. 
 
Councillor Maria White introduced the motion.  There were interventions from Councillors Gerry 
O’Connor; Paddy Meade and Brian Fitzgerald noting the Council’s response. 
 
The motion, together with supporting information, was agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Maria White and seconded by Councillor Helen Meyer.  Councillor Gerry O’Connor dissented 
from the motion. 
 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
“To uphold the highest standards of consistency, transparency, and fairness in the 
allocation of social housing, all available housing units designated for allocation, 
should be advertised through the Choice Based Lettings (CBL) system, including all 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
one, two, three, and four-bedroom houses, except in very limited cases eg medical 
priority, transfers etc.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
Meath County Council’s Housing Department advertises all three-bedroom 
properties and most two-bedroom properties on CBL (Choice-Based Letting). In 
some limited cases, two-bedroom properties may be offered outside of CBL to 
accommodate disability or transfer requests. Four- bedroom properties are not 
advertised on CBL due to their very limited availability; these are allocated to 
families in need of a transfer to larger accommodations. One-bedroom properties 
are also not advertised on CBL because of their limited availability, and applicants 
with the longest waiting times are prioritised for these homes, as set out in the 
Council’s Allocation Scheme for the Provision of Social Housing Support. 
 
Councillor Maria White introduced the motion.  There were interventions from Councillors Mike 
Bray, Maria Murphy and Nick Killian outlining their opposition to the motion.  On the proposal of 
Councillor Maria White and seconded by Councillor Helen Meyer it was agreed to refer the 
matter to the Housing SPC in respect of the upcoming review of Meath County Council’s Allocation 
Scheme for Provision of Social Housing Support. 
 
 
10.0   
General Interest Motions 
None 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
There was no other business. 
 
The meeting concluded at 5.55pm 
 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
 
 
 
