 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
3rd March 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Sharon Tolan 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Mike Bray, Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, Yvonne Everard, 
Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Noel French, Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Wayne Harding, 
Suzanne Jamal, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Helen Meyer, Maria Murphy, Sarah Reilly, 
Amanda Smith and Emer Tóibín. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillors Dave Boyne, Eugene Cassidy, Sean Drew, Eddie Fennessy, Geraldine Keogan, Stephen 
McKee, Paddy Meade, Ronan Moore, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Alan Tobin, Conor Tormey and 
Maria White.  
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Peter Caffrey, Joe Fox and Gerry O’Connor. 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Barry Lynch, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona 
Fallon, Pádraig Maguire. 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 27th January 2025 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on 27th January 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy. 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of meeting held on 19th February 2025 
 
The minutes of the Special meeting held on 19th February 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Michael Gallagher and seconded by Councillor Brian Fitzgerald. 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
Councillor Nick Killian raised the matter regarding tenancy allocations at the Aylesbury 
development.  His comments were supported by Councillor Noel French. 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
Expressions of Sympathy were extended to: 
 
Áine Bird, Rural Regeneration on the death of her brother, Micheál Bird. 
 
The family of the late Sean Kelleher, former employee. 
 
Jason Sheils, Transportation on the death of his mother, Ann Sheils. 
 
Kevin Flanagan, Kells Station Officer on the death of his father, Michael Flanagan, former Fire 
Fighter. 
 
The family of the late Bernard (Benny) Coldrick, former employee. 
 
The family of the late Michael Kiernan, former employee. 
 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
None 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
  
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
To consider the Audit Committee Annual Report 2024 from Ms. Geraldine 
Tallon, Chair of Audit Committee. 
Ms. Geraldine Tallon, Chair of the Meath County Council Audit Committee, presented the key details 
of the Audit Committee's Annual Report for 2024, along with the Audit Committee Report in relation 
to the AFS and LG Auditor’s Report 2023.  She emphasized the Committee's ongoing commitment to 
providing independent assurance regarding the Council's control environment and governance 
framework. Ms. Tallon also expressed the Committee's satisfaction that it has fulfilled its statutory 
obligations under the Local Government Acts and related regulations. She acknowledged the 
robustness of the Council’s financial management systems and acknowledged the transition from a 
significant deficit to a modest surplus in the end-of-year accounts. Finally, Ms. Tallon thanked the 
members of the Audit Committee for their dedication and further acknowledged the continued 
support from the Council's executive team. 
 
Councillors Sean Drew and Maria Murphy acknowledged the ongoing commitment of the Audit 
Committee. 
 
5.1.2 
To consider the Audit Committee Report in relation to the AFS and LG 
Auditor’s Report 2023 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
5.1.3  To adopt the Audit Committee Charter 2025 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
The Audit Committee Charter 2025 was adopted on the proposal of Councillor Maria Murphy, 
seconded by Councillor Nick Killian and unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
5.1.4  To adopt the Audit Committee Annual Work Programme 2025 
The Audit Committee Annual Work Programme 2025 was adopted on the proposal of Councillor 
Maria Murphy, seconded by Councillor Padraig Coffey and unanimously agreed by the Elected 
Members. 
 
5.2 
Community 
 
5.2.1 
To receive a presentation from Meath Comhairle na nÓg. 
 
Ms. Olivia Costello and Ms. Lisa O’Reilly updated the members on the activities of Meath Comhairle 
na nÓg. They expressed their concerns about several issues, including the availability of period 
products in schools, the limited number of autism classes within the County, and the availability of 
full-time school completion staff/career guidance teachers.  Additionally, they requested the support 
of the Elected Members for their annual Youth Conference and urged ongoing consultation with the 
Comhairle to ensure that youth voices are heard and considered in decision-making processes. 
 
There were interventions of support from Councillors Nick Killian; Noel French; Maria White; Mike 
Bray; Wayne Harding; Ronan Moore; Emer Tóibín; Sarah Reilly; Helen Meyer and An 
Cathaoirleach.   
 
5.3 
Transportation 
 
5.3.1 
To approve the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) (Housing Estates) County 
of Meath Bye-Laws (No. 1) 2024 
 
The Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) (Housing Estates) County of Meath Bye-Laws (No. 1) 2024 
were approved on the proposal of Councillor Wayne Harding, seconded by Councillor Padraig 
Fitzsimons and unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian; Noel French; Helen Meyer; Brian Fitzgerald; 
Alan Tobin; Ronan Moore; Joe Bonner; Maria Murphy; Padraig Fitzsimons; Eddie Fennessy and 
Fionnan Blake.  Matter raised included: 
 
Community 
East Meath Civic Centre, Ashbourne Skatepark,  
 
Housing 
Land banks, cost rental schemes, housing support clinics, energy upgrades, 
affordable housing, tenant-in-situ scheme,  
 
Planning 
Reduction in number of commencencement notices,  
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Transport 
NTA funding, R135 roadworks, dezone lands, Navan to Trim Pathfinder Project.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Brian Fitzgerald, seconded by Councillor Nick Killian and agreed by 
the Elected Members to write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to seek 
approval to rezone lands that were de-zoned in the review of the last County Development Plan. 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday, February 24, at the East Meath 
Civic Centre in Bettystown and that the draft agenda and arrangements for the February Council 
Meeting were reviewed.  She further outlined that the reports of the Climate Action, Environment 
and Emergency Services SPC, 22nd January 2025, the Community & Cultural Development and 
Gaeltacht Affairs SPC, 22nd January 2025 and the Forward Planning and Development 
Management SPC, 7th February 2025 were noted by the CPG and the minutes of the meetings 
have been uploaded to the Resources Section of Decision Time. 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Francis Deane 
 
"What is the proposed time frame for resurfacing the R153 (Duleek to Navan), 
following the recent water mains pipe installation?" 
 
Response 
 
All permanent reinstatement will be as specified by the ‘Guidelines for Managing 
Openings in Public Road’, also known as the ‘Purple Book’, and any conditions 
prescribed by the Road Opening Licence. 
 
The contractor is required to develop the schedule and sequencing for the 
permanent reinstatement works along the R153. The permanent reinstatement will 
be half carriageway width and may require some short term road closures. The 
contractor’s proposed programme will be submitted in 2025 for consideration and 
approval, it is anticipated works will take place during the summer months and 
further information will be communicated to the Navan, Ashbourne and Laytown 
Bettystown Municipal Districts before and during the reinstatement works. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
"How much has been allocated to the tenant in situ scheme this year?" 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Response 
 
Meath County Council has been advised that the Government is expected to make a 
decision on a tenant-in-situ programme for 2025 shortly, which will then be 
communicated to local authorities. The Housing Authority continues to take 
appropriate steps to support households at risk of homelessness, including in cases 
where tenants have been served with a notice of termination by their landlord. As a 
standard practice, the Housing Authority assesses all the options available in each 
case and decides on the appropriate action. All available options are considered to 
prevent homelessness. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria Murphy 
 
“What are the plans for the parklets which were installed outside public houses and 
restaurants etc. during COVID-19.” 
 
Response 
 
A scheme of parklets was provided by Meath County Council across the County 
with Department of Transport/NTA funding. Unless otherwise authorised (for 
example by way of planning permission), street furniture on the public road 
associated with outdoor dining requires a licence under Section 254 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000-2023. A significant number of licences were 
required and processed for the parklets. These schemes have since closed. 
However, applicants must continue to comply with any conditions attached to a 
licence, including in respect of the duration of the licence. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
 
 
 
8.4 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“Can the Chief Executive clarify how many section 183s had taken place in the year 
2015?” 
 
Response 
 
In accordance with Assets S183 register, a total of 17 Section 183 applications were 
approved in 2015. 
 
Mr. Martin Murray noted that there was a clerical error in the response provided and he noted that 
a total of 23 Section 183 applications were approved in 2015. 
Noted by the Elected Members 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Francis Deane 
 
“I call on Meath County Council to engage with local farming organisations, such as 
the Irish Farmers' Association (IFA) and the Irish Cattle and Sheep Farmers' 
Association (ICMS), to implement a scheme, similar to those established by other 
local authorities, to address the concerns related to falling and diseased trees in 
proximity to overhead power lines.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
The legal responsibility for maintenance of road side trees rest with the landowner. 
If a Central Government funded scheme is developed through or in conjunction with 
any specific association or organisation, Meath County Council will administer 
accordingly. 
 
Councillor Francis Deane introduced the motion and welcomed the response. He noted that central 
government funding would be required to assist farmers in addressing the issue. 
The Motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Francis Deane and seconded by Councillor Nick Killian. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
 
“To ask the council to invite public submissions, through way of an online portal, so 
as to understand Meath resident’s experience of Storm Eowyn, and in doing so help 
the county learn lessons and prepare for weather events of such magnitude in the 
future”. 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
Meath County Council and the Meath Local Coordination Group acknowledge the 
significant impact of Storm Eowyn on communities across the county. We 
understand the importance of learning from this experience to better prepare for 
future severe weather events. Therefore, we will be conducting a comprehensive 
review of our response to Storm Eowyn, working closely with key stakeholders 
including emergency services, community representatives, and relevant agencies. 
 
This review will include a thorough examination of how we identify and support 
those most vulnerable and at-risk during severe weather events. We recognise that 
the impact of such events can vary significantly across different demographics and 
locations, and our review will take this into account. We will be looking at ways to 
improve our communication strategies, resource allocation, and support 
mechanisms to ensure we are effectively reaching and assisting those who need it 
most. For the purpose of this specific review, we will be conducting a targeted 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
review process with key stakeholders. This approach will allow us to gather focused 
feedback from those directly involved in the response to Storm Eowyn. 
 
Councillor Ronan Moore introduced the motion and welcomed the response. He noted the 
importance of learning from the recent experience of Storm Eowyn . 
The Motion proposed by Councillor Ronan Moore, seconded by Councillor Joe Bonner was 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
 
“To ask the Executive to clarify the timescales for commencements of roads waiting 
to be resurfaced on the Community Involvement scheme.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
The existing list of Community Involvement Schemes applications is currently being 
assessed to develop the 2025 list for the Department of Transport funding, the 
discharge of this funding has specific requirements as set out in the Memorandum 
for Grants for Regional and Local Roads. €3,083,800 of Own Resources has been 
committed to investment in Local Tertiary (Class 3) Roads with 15% of this figure 
allocated to cul-de-sacs. The tender process has commenced for the 2025 
Roadworks Programme, once tenders are returned there will be greater clarity on 
how many cul-de-sacs works can be completed. Upon tender evaluation and 
assessment the number of CIS and cul-de-sacs to be delivered this year will be 
communicated to the members as well as a proposed estimation for future years. 
 
Councillor Fionnan Blake introduced the motion and called for a review of the scheme by Central 
Government.  The Motion proposed by Councillor Fionnan Blake and seconded by Councillor Helen 
Meyer was unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“Recognising the considerable cost incurred by Meath County Council in dealing with 
the damage caused by fallen trees due to Storm Éowyn, that Meath County Council 
engage with landowners, local groups and organisations on the planting and 
management of trees throughout the county.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
The legal responsibility for maintenance of road side trees rests with the landowner. 
Currently there are agencies available to provide tree management advice for all 
private landowners and other groups, the Tree Council of Ireland also has 
considerable resources relating to the planting of the right tree in the right place. 
 
The provision of specific advice is outside the remit of the local authority. 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion.  She noted the response and noted the importance 
of ensuring the correct type of trees are planted in the correct locations. 
The Motion, proposed by Councillor Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Fionnan Blake was 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
 
10.0   
General Interest Motions 
 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Brian Fitzgerald 
 
"I call on Meath County Council to write to the ESB Networks to carry out a Risk 
Assessment of their overhead Distribution/network, also the Telecommunication 
Network providers, to minimize the more frequent occurrence of overhead wires 
falling due to, falling trees and disturbing the transmission network for prolonged 
periods." 
 
Councillor Brian Fitzgerald introduced the motion.  He noted the economic impact of the recent 
storms and he called for the Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy to co-ordinate efforts to 
mitigate damage to the electrical and telecommunications network.  The motion proposed by 
Councillor Brian Fitzgerald and seconded by Councillor Francis Deane was unanimously agreed by 
the Elected Members. 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Social Protection asking for 
the time spent on course reading and study to be disregarded when calculating the 
max 18.5 hour limit allowed to those in receipt of Carer’s Allowance who wish to 
complete courses in education.” 
 
Councillor Carol Lennon introduced the motion.  She noted that the 18.5-hour limit for education 
courses, which includes time spent on study and reading, was potentially a barrier for carers wishing 
to engage in further education. 
The motion proposed by Councillor Carol Lennon and seconded by Councillor Alan Lawes was 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
 
10.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“To ask Meath County Council to call on the LGFA (Ladies Gaelic Football Association) 
to reverse its transgender policy, for the sake of the safety of their membership and 
the sake of fairness on the football field.” 
 
Councillor Emer Tóibín introduced the motion.  She called on the LGFA to reverse its transgender 
policy which she stated was introduced without consultation. 
There were interventions from Councillors Maria Murphy; Sarah Reilly; Wayne Harding; Carol 
Lennon; Dave Boyne; Brian Fitzgerald and An Cathaoirleach.  While there was some support for the 
motion, other Elected Members felt that it was not appropriate for Meath County Council to 
interfere in another organisation’s democratic processes. 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
The motion proposed by Councillor Emer Tóibín and seconded by Councillor Yvonne Everard was 
defeated on a show-of-hands vote, with 9 members in agreement, 15 members not in agreement, 
and 1 abstention. 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
The meeting concluded at 3.45pm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
