 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
3rd March 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings 
are regulated by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for 
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to 
maintain infection prevention and control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and 
members of the press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand 
hygiene and sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements 
as briefed at the start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the 
Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your 
microphone on mute at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 27th January 2025 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of meeting held on 19th February 2025 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations (Standing Order 11.5 – Expressions of 
Congratulations to be submitted in writing by 10am, Monday 3rd March 2025) 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
To consider the Audit Committee Annual Report 2024 from Ms. Geraldine 
Tallon, Chair of the Audit Committee 
 
5.1.2 
To consider the Audit Committee Report in relation to the AFS and LG 
Auditor’s Report 2023 
 
5.1.3 
To adopt the Audit Committee Charter 2025 
 
5.1.4 
To adopt the Audit Committee Annual Work Programme 2025 
 
5.2 
Community 
 
5.2.1 
To receive a presentation from Meath Comhairle na nÓg 
 
 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
5.3 
Transportation 
  
5.3.1 
To approve the ‘Road Traffic (Special Speed Limit) (Housing Estates) County 
of Meath Bye-Laws (No.1) 2024’ 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Francis Deane 
 
"What is the proposed time frame for resurfacing the R153 (Duleek to Navan), 
following the recent water mains pipe installation?" 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 
"How much has been allocated to the tenant in situ scheme this year?" 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Maria Murphy 
 
“What are the plans for the parklets which were installed outside public houses and 
restaurants etc. during COVID-19?” 
 
8.4 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“Can the Chief Executive clarify how many section 183s had taken place in the year 
2015?” 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Francis Deane 
 
“I call on Meath County Council to engage with local farming organisations, such as 
the Irish Farmers' Association (IFA) and the Irish Cattle and Sheep Farmers' 
Association (ICMS), to implement a scheme, similar to those established by other 
local authorities, to address the concerns related to falling and diseased trees in 
proximity to overhead power lines.” 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
 
“To ask the council to invite public submissions, through way of an online portal, so 
as to understand Meath resident’s experience of Storm Eowyn, and in doing so help 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
the county learn lessons and prepare for weather events of such magnitude in the 
future”. 
 
  
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
 
“To ask the Executive to clarify the timescales for commencements of roads waiting 
to be resurfaced on the Community Involvement scheme.” 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“Recognising the considerable cost incurred by Meath County Council in dealing with 
the damage caused by fallen trees due to Storm Éowyn, that Meath County Council 
engage with landowners, local groups and organisations on the planting and 
management of trees throughout the county.” 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Brian Fitzgerald 
 
"I call on Meath County Council to write to the ESB Networks to carry out a Risk 
Assessment of their overhead Distribution/network, also the Telecommunication 
Network providers, to minimize the more frequent occurrence of overhead wires 
falling due to, falling trees and disturbing the transmission network for prolonged 
periods." 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Social Protection asking for 
the time spent on course reading and study to be disregarded when calculating the 
max 18.5 hour limit allowed to those in receipt of Carer’s Allowance who wish to 
complete courses in education.” 
 
10.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“To ask Meath County Council to call on the LGFA (Ladies Gaelic Football Association) 
to reverse its transgender policy, for the sake of the safety of their membership and 
the sake of fairness on the football field.” 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
 
12.0   
Any Other Business 
 
 
 
 
NB Please ensure mobile phones are switched off during council meeting.  
  
 
 
