 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
7th April 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Sharon Tolan 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Mike Bray, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, 
Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, Sean Drew, John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig 
Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel French, Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Wayne Harding, Suzanne Jamal, 
Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Paddy Meade, Helen Meyer, Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, 
Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly and Alan Tobin. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillors Eddie Fennessy, Geraldine Keogan, Ronan Moore, Caroline O’Reilly, Amanda Smith, Emer 
Tóibín, Conor Tormey and Maria White.  
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Dave Boyne and Stephen McKee. 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Barry Lynch, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona 
Fallon, Pádraig Maguire. 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Gerry O’Connor it was 
unanimously agreed to bring forward items 5.1.1 to 5.1.4 on the agenda. 
 
5.1.1  To fill the casual vacancy in the Membership of Meath County Council, following the election 
of former Councillor Linda Nelson Murray (Navan Municipal District) to Seanad Éireann, in 
accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
The Meetings Administrator outlined the provisions of Section 19 of the Local Government 
Act 2001, as amended.  She noted that pursuant to S.19(3)(a) a nomination for co-option to 
Meath County Council, dated 31st March 2025, was received from Mr. John Lohan, Regional 
Organiser of Fine Gael advising that Mr. John Duffy had been nominated as the replacement 
for Councillor Linda Nelson-Murray and that written consent had been received from Mr. 
Duffy consenting to co-option to the local authority in accordance with Section 19(5) of the 
Act. 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Mr. John Duffy was proposed by Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Gerry 
O’Connor to fill the casual vacancy.  An Cathaoirleach deemed the casual vacancy to be 
filled. 
Councillors Sarah Reilly; Gerry O’Connor; Yemi Adenuga; Padraig Fitzsimons and An 
Cathaoirleach offered their congratulations and welcomed Councillor Duffy to the Council.   
 
Councillor John Duffy thanked the proposer and seconder. He noted his interest in 
supporting small businesses within the County and reaffirmed his support for those 
businesses in his new role. 
The Chief Executive extended his congratulations to Councillor Duffy, noting that it was an 
opportune time for him to join the Council and that there is a good future ahead for County 
Meath. 
 
 
5.1.2 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to the Forward Planning & Development Management 
SPC following the election of former Cllr Linda Nelson Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
 
As proposed by Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Sarah Reilly and 
unanimously agreed, Councillor John Duffy was appointed to the Forward Planning & 
Development Management SPC. 
 
5.1.3 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to the Board of Irish Public Bodies Mutual Insurances 
Ltd following the election of former Cllr Linda Nelson Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
 
As proposed by Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Yemi Adenuga and 
unanimously agreed, Councillor John Duffy was appointed to the Board of Irish Public 
Bodies Mutual Insurances Ltd. 
  
5.1.4 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to Boyne Valley Tourism Ltd following the election of 
former Cllr Linda Nelson Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
As proposed by Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Yemi Adenuga and 
unanimously agreed, Councillor John Duffy was appointed to Boyne Valley Tourism Ltd. 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 3rd March 2025 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on 3rd March 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Francis Deane and seconded by Councillor Nick Killian. 
 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
Councillor Yvonne Everard queried details in relation to Section 183 Disposals of Land.  A response 
was provided by Mr. Martin Murray. 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
 
3.1 
Expressions of Sympathy were extended to: 
 
Marcella Meegan, Housing Department on the death of her mother, Mary Olivia (Ollie) Daly. 
 
The family of the late Maureen King, Meath Association of London. 
 
Gerry Martin, Water Services & Bernie Martin, Transportation on the death of their brother/brother-
in-law, Noel (Tiger) Martin. 
 
Dympna Tuite, Oldcastle Library on the death of her sister, Kathleen/Kate Tuite. 
 
Pat Shore, Rural Regeneration on the death of his father, Robert Shore. 
 
John V Farrelly and the extended Farrelly and Cahill family, on the death of his daughter, Emma Jane 
Cahill. 
 
3.2 
Expressions of Congratulations were extended to: 
 
Nichola Sheridan (Bohermeen AC) on winning the inaugural Dublin City Half Marathon. 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.14Ha of land by way of transfer of Freehold Interest at 
Balgatheran, Tullyallen, Drogheda, Co. Louth, in accordance with Statutory Notice 
dated 13th March 2025. 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 13th March, 2025 under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Wayne Harding and seconded by Councillor Noel French. 
 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
To fill the casual vacancy in the Membership of Meath County Council, 
following the election of former Councillor Linda Nelson Murray (Navan 
Municipal District) to Seanad Éireann, in accordance with Section 19 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, as amended. 
 
As noted above. 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
5.1.2 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to the Forward Planning & 
Development Management SPC following the election of former Cllr Linda 
Nelson Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
As noted above. 
 
5.1.3 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to the Board of Irish Public Bodies 
Mutual Insurances Ltd following the election of former Cllr Linda Nelson 
Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
As noted above. 
  
5.1.4 
To appoint a replacement Councillor to Boyne Valley Tourism Ltd following 
the election of former Cllr Linda Nelson Murray to Seanad Éireann 
 
As noted above. 
 
5.1.5 
To receive an update on Meath Women’s Caucus 
 
Councillor Maria Murphy, Chairperson of Meath Women’s Caucus provided an 
update of the activities of Meath Women’s Caucus noting the following: 
 
The Meath Women’s Caucus held its 2024 AGM on October 22, where new officers 
were elected: Councillor Maria Murphy as Chairperson, Councillor Helen Meyer as 
Vice Chairperson, Councillor Sarah O’Reilly as Secretary, and Councillor Yemi 
Adenuga as PRO.  The meeting focused on discussing various motions, including the 
organisation of a breakfast event for caucus members who are General Election 
candidates.  This event took place on November 12 at Bellinter House and allowed 
members, including 7 candidates, to share insights about their campaigns. Councillor 
Aisling Dempsey and Councillor Gillian Toole were elected to Dáil Eireann, with 
Councillor Linda Nelson Murray elected to Seanad Éireann. 
 
In subsequent meetings, significant topics were addressed, including a motion 
proposed by Councillor Carol Lennon regarding the Carers Allowance, which was 
adopted. The Caucus also prepared for International Women’s Day by participating 
in a video honouring female leaders within the Council, and they attended a charity 
event, the Navan Rotary Ladies Lunch. The Caucus, established in 2022, emphasizes 
inclusivity and aims to unify women and gender minority councillors across various 
parties. 
 
5.1.6 
To Appoint Sectoral Nominee to Strategic Policy Committee 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Alan Lawes, seconded by Councillor Francis Deane 
and unanimously agreed, Mr. John Michael Murphy, Navan Pride and representative 
of the Community Voluntary Pillar of the PPN, was appointed to the Housing and 
Integration SPC. 
 
5.2 
Finance 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
5.2.1 
To receive the Draft Annual Financial Statement 2024 
 
Ms. Sheila Harkin, Financial Management Accountant, provided an overview of the details of 
the Draft Annual Financial Statement 2024.  She outlined the analysis of revenue income and 
expenditure and noted a cumulative general reserve surplus of €554,599 at the end of 2024.  
In addition, the value of the total fixed assets reflected in the balance sheet at 31st Dec 2024 
of €3.147bn was noted. 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Gerry O’Connor; Brian Fitzgerald; Nick Killian; 
Sean Drew and Ronan Moore.  The improvements in the Council’s finances, as well as the 
support to local businesses, were noted.  The Chief Executive acknowledged the excellent 
debt. collection rates by the Council and he noted that the Council operated extremely 
efficiently when benchmarked against other similar local authorities. 
 
5.2.2 
To approve: 
 
(i) 
revised expenditure for the financial year ended 31st December 2024 as set 
out in Table A in accordance with S104 of the Local Government Act  2001 
 
Approved on the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Joe Fox 
and unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
(ii) 
transfer to and from Capital as set out in Table B. 
 
Approved on the proposal of Councillor Sean Drew, seconded by Councillor Gerry O’Connor 
and unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
 
5.3 
Climate Action and Environment 
 
5.3.1 
To receive Meath County Council’s Climate Action Plan 2024 - 2029 Annual Progress 
Report 2024 
 
Ms. Mary Darcy, Climate Change Co-Ordinator, provided an overview of the salient details of 
the Council’s Climate Action Plan Annual Progress Report. She noted that during 2024, 94% 
of actions in the Climate Action Plan commenced implementation, while 6% are scheduled 
to commence after 2024. Of the 71 actions, 49%  were fully completed by the end of 2024, 
5%  are in progress, and 46% are set to recur annually. 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Alan Tobin; Maria Murphy; Gerry 
O’Connor; Paddy Meade; Ronan Moore; Michael Gallagher and Helen Meyer.  Matters 
raised included the requirement for further EV charging points, illegal burning and 
community grants.  Ms. Mary Darcy and Mr. Barry Lynch responded to queries raised.   
 
 
5.3.2 
To approve the Meath County Council Draft Litter Management Plan 2025-2027 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ms. Bernadine Carry, Environmental Education Officer, provided an overview of the salient 
details of the Litter Management Plan 2025 – 2027. She outlined the challenges, including 
litter from cigarettes and e-cigarettes and ‘dashboard dining’.  She provided further details 
on current initiatives and the Council's education and public awareness campaigns. 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Alan Tobin; Noel French; Nick 
Killian; Maria Murphy; Mike Bray; Eddie Fennessy; Paddy Meade; Helen Meyer; Padraig 
Coffey; Joe Bonner; Yvonne Everard; Wayne Harding; Alan Lawes; Carol Lennon and An 
Cathaoirleach.  Matters raised included recycling e-cigarettes, dog fouling and the provision 
of bins, use of CCTV, fly-tipping, littering at bring banks, graffiti.  The benefits of the bulky 
waste collection days were acknowledged. 
Ms. Bernadine Carry and Mr. Barry Lynch responded to queries raised.  
 
The Meath County Council Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 was adopted on the proposal of 
Councillor Nick Killian, seconded by Councillor Noel French and unanimously agreed by the 
Elected Members. 
 
 
5.4 
Community 
 
5.4.1 
To note the Meath LCDC Annual Report 2024 
 
Mr. Barry Lynch provided an overview of the work carried out by the LCDC in 2024 including 
implementing the actions of the Local Economic and Community Plan, the LEADER 
Programme, SICAP, Healthy Ireland Fund and Local Enhancement Programme.  There were 
interventions from Councillors Maria Murphy; Alan Lawes; Eddie Fennessy; Ronan Moore 
and An Cathaoirleach.  The ongoing work of the Committee was acknowledged; however, 
the disappointing attendance by some sectors of the Committee was expressed.  Mr. Barry 
Lynch provided responses to matters raised. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian; Alan Lawes; Padraig Fitzsimons; Gerry 
O’Connor; Helen Meyer; Alan Tobin; Sean Drew and Padraig Fitzsimons.  Matters raised included: 
 
Housing:   
Commencement Notices; Standards of social housing; Energy retrofit 
programme; Affordable housing; Tenant-in-Situ Scheme;  
 
Transport: 
Active Travel Infrastructure, Safe Routes to School Applications; Ashbourne 
Bridge;   
 
Planning: 
Judicial Reviews County Development Plan; Implementation of the new 
Planning and Development Act 
 
Corporate Services: 
Local Lens Podcast; Role of elected members on associated companies;  
 
Environment:  
Illegal dumping,  

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
Community:  
 
 IPAS Centres;  
 
Responses to queries raised were provided by Ms. Fiona Fallon, Mr. Martin Murray, Mr. Padraig 
Maguire, Mr. Des Foley and Mr. Barry Lynch. 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday, March 31 2025, to consider the 
draft agenda and arrangements for the April Council Meeting.   
 
She noted that the Protocol for dealing with complaints made against elected members and the 
Council’s Anti-Fraud and Corruption Policy and Procedure had been reviewed. 
 
She also noted that the members of the CPG had discussed the Draft Annual Financial Statement 
2024 and the Meath County Council Draft Litter Management Plan.  There was an update on the IPB 
insurance scheme for Tidy Town Groups within the County. 
 
She further outlined that the reports of the Housing and Integration SPC, 13th February 2025, 
the Transportation and Urban Regeneration SPC, 20th February 2025 and the Economic 
Development, Enterprise, Tourism, EU Affairs and Rural Regeneration SPC, 13th March 2025 
were noted.  In addition, the work programme for the Transportation and Urban Regeneration SPC 
was approved, and the respective documentation has been uploaded to the Resources Section of 
Decision Time. 
 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
The correspondence was noted. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
“Does the Planning Authority provide guidance on noise insulation measures to 
applicants proposing to build residential developments located under current flight 
paths?” 
 
Response 
  
The Meath County Development Plan 2021-2027 includes policies and objectives to 
protect residential amenity of housing development located in the designated 
airport noise zones identified by DAA and provided to Meath County Council in 
2020. 
 
Separately to this, day-evening-night airport noise contours are published on 
https://fingalcoco.maps.arcgis.com/apps/instant/basic/index.html?appid=4f351ec9

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
5a3849c9945eff 67b8ca2f01. Residential planning permissions granted within these 
zones are accompanied by an advisory note highlighting the risk of noise nuisance 
having regard to the current operational flight paths of Dublin Airport, and advising 
the applicant/developer to consult qualified noise experts for further guidance to 
safeguard their residential amenity. 
 
 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
"What is the Council's policy in relation to the provision of cycle lanes and wide 
footpaths along local roads?" 
 
Response 
 
It is the Council’s Policy to provide cycle lanes and widened footpaths along local 
roads to improve road safety and increase levels of active travel in the County, 
subject to site constraints and assessment, funding and resource availability, and the 
competing priorities of the Council. 
 
The Transportation Department is responsible for the planning, design, and 
maintenance of the regional and local roads within County Meath. As part of new 
roads projects or road upgrade projects (including local roads), the Council 
considers, as part of design process, the provision of measures to improve road 
safety for all users which includes the provision of cycle and pedestrian 
infrastructure where appropriate. 
 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"How many housing units are currently registered as short-term lets with Meath 
County Council and how many enforcement cases have commenced on properties 
that do not have the correct planning permission?" 
 
Response 
 
There are 4 properties registered for short term lets on the 2025 register so far. 
Currently, there are no open enforcement cases in relation to short term lets. 
 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Wayne Harding 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
“I call on Meath County Council to work in conjunction with relevant stakeholders to 
ensure that any critically ill patients in our county can avail of an emergency power 
supply in the event of any power outage similar to what happened in the recent 
storm Eowyn.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
Meath County Council is conducting a comprehensive review of the response to 
Storm Eowyn, working closely with key stakeholders including emergency services, 
community representatives, and relevant agencies. 
 
This review includes a thorough examination of how we identify and support those 
most vulnerable and at-risk during severe weather events. We recognise that the 
impact of such events can vary significantly across different demographics and 
locations, and the review will take this into account. Following this review, the 
Council will inform the key stakeholders and relevant statutory bodies of the 
findings. We will also be looking at ways to improve our communication strategies, 
resource allocation, and support mechanisms to ensure we are effectively reaching 
and assisting those who need it most. 
 
Councillor Wayne Harding introduced the motion and welcomed the response from the Executive.  
Councillor Alan Tobin expressed his support.  The Motion, together with supporting information, 
was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Wayne Harding and seconded by Councillor 
Padraig Fitzsimons. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"That Meath County Council undertakes an advertising campaign to educate the 
public about the planning regulations regarding short-term letting in residential 
properties." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
Planning regulations in respect of short term letting were introduced in 2019. These 
set out the circumstances in which the use of a dwelling for short term letting is 
exempted development or requires planning permission. Details of the exemptions 
and requirements for those involved in short term letting (STL) are available on the 
Meath County Council website. 
 
There are changes proposed to the registration of short term letting properties. In 
December 2022, the Government announced that new legislation was to be 
prepared which would require that properties advertised for short-term letting have 
a valid registration number provided by Fáilte Ireland. When registering, the short-
term letting host will be required to declare that they comply with current statutory 
obligations, including planning requirements, and Fáilte Ireland will be able to share 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
data with local authorities about short-term letting units operating in their area. 
Local Authorities will then be able to confirm if the short-term letting units have the 
necessary planning permission. The Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage has also committed to developing Planning Guidelines for the short-term 
letting sector to supplement the introduction of this legislation. 
 
Subject to the legislation being passed, Meath County Council will work with all 
agencies in a comprehensive advertising campaign to inform the public about the 
updated requirements. 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion.  She noted the availability of short-term letting 
throughout the County.  The Motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously 
agreed on the proposal of Councillor Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"That Meath County Council considers implementing the Relove Paint Community 
Paint Grant Scheme, which is currently offered by other local authorities." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered 
 
Meath County Council operates a paint recovery scheme with the Rediscovery 
Centre. The Rediscovery Centre is a social enterprise that collects unwanted paint 
from recycling centres and reuses it to create new colours. We are in discussions 
with the Rediscovery Centre regarding a potential rollout of a grant or voucher 
scheme for free or reduced-cost paint for eligible community groups. 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion.  She acknowledged the response from the Executive 
and noted that she was looking forward to the roll-out of the scheme.  The motion, together with 
supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Helen Meyer and 
seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
“I call on Meath County Council to write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to review the current funding streams available to assist in 
the purchase of affordable homes and the funding mechanism for local authorities in 
the delivery of affordable homes.” 
 
Councillor Alan Tobin introduced the motion.  He noted that further provision of affordable housing 
was urgently needed.  The motion was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Alan Tobin 
and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
"In light of a recruitment crisis for many essential state sectors, to write to the 
Minister for Social Protection to consider a rental subsidy for key workers to 
encourage qualified personnel including Gardai, nurses, teachers, local authority and 
emergency workers to take up employment in larger towns and cities." 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Alan Tobin and seconded by Councillor Gerry O’Connor 
Councillor Alan Tobin introduced the motion.  He noted the difficulties experienced by some 
essential workers in accessing accommodation.  There were interventions from Councillors Paddy 
Meade; Nick Killian; Padraig Coffey; Gerry O’Connor and Eddie Fennessy.  Some of the Elected 
Members felt that while the motion was well-intentioned, there were others within the community 
who would be excluded.  Councillor Alan Tobin agreed to withdraw the motion to review it and 
resubmit it at a later date. 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
Councillor Alan Lawes queried, in light of recent tariffs imposed on exports to the USA, the support 
being provided to local businesses that export to the USA.  Mr. Dara McGowan noted that the 
Council was reaching out to businesses to ascertain the level of support required. 
 
The meeting concluded at 5.15pm 
