 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
12th May 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Sharon Tolan 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, 
John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Eddie Fennessy, Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel 
French, Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Wayne Harding, Suzanne Jamal, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol 
Lennon, Paddy Meade, Helen Meyer, Ronan Moore, Gerry O’Connor, Sarah Reilly, Amanda Smith, Alan 
Tobin, Emer Tóibín and Maria White. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Dave Boyne, Mike Bray, Sean Drew, Geraldine Keogan, Maria Murphy, 
Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke and Conor Tormey. 
 
Apologies:   
Councillor Stephen McKee. 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Barry Lynch, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona 
Fallon, Pádraig Maguire. 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 7th April 2025 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on 7th April 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Francis Deane  and seconded by Councillor Alan Tobin. 
 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were no matters arising. 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations 
Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
 
Joe O’Callaghan, Transportation – Ashbourne MD on the death of his mother, Carmel O’Callaghan. 
 
Lisa Shealy (Housing), Sharon Shealy (HR), James Shealy (Transport), Mark Harrington (Housing) and 
Dean Smyth (Planning) on the death of their mother/mother-in-law/ grandmother, Kathleen Shealy. 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
Marie Ennis, Finance and Finn Ennis, Transportation – Trim MD on the death of their father/father-
in-law, Gerry Dunne, former employee. 
 
The family of the late Anthony (Tony) Callan, former employee. 
 
Caroline Reilly, Water Services on the death of her mother, Rosaline Reilly. 
 
Neil Casey, Transportation – Navan MD on the death of his mother, Carmel Casey. 
 
The family of the late Brendan (Barney) Foley, former employee. 
 
Ronan Carey (Transport), Gerry Carey (Water Services & Fire Service) and Tony Carey (Transport) on 
the death of their mother/aunt, Margaret Carey. 
 
The family and colleagues of the late Garda Kevin Flatley, Balbriggan. 
 
The families of the late Emmanuel Familola and Matt Sibanda, Co. Donegal. 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act, 2001 
There were no proposals for the disposal of land. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Community 
 
5.1.1 
To approve the allocations under the Community Grants 
Scheme 2025 as recommended by the Community, Cultural 
Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC on April 30, 2025 
The allocations for the Community Grants Scheme 2025 were approved on the 
proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly, seconded by Councillor Joe Fox and unanimously 
agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
5.1.2 
To approve the allocations under the 2025 Regional 
Festivals and Participative Events – Small Grants Scheme 
in Co. Meath as recommended by Community, Cultural 
Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC on April 30, 
2025 
The allocations for the 2025 Regional Festivals and Participative Events – Small Grants 
Scheme in Co. Meath were approved on the proposal of Councillor Ronan Moore, 
seconded by Councillor Paddy Meade and unanimously agreed by the Elected 
Members. 
 
5.1.3 
To approve Arts Grants Awards & Bursaries 2025 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
allocations as recommended by the Community, Cultural 
Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC on April 30 2025 
The allocations for the Arts Grants Awards & Bursaries 2025 were approved on the 
proposal of Councillor Francis Deane, seconded by Councillor Yemi Adenuga and 
unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
5.2 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.2.1 
To Consider the Meath County Council Civic Commemoration Policy 
Ms. Elaine Daly, Senior Executive Officer, Corporate Affairs and Governance provided an overview of 
the salient details of the policy.  On the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy and seconded by 
Councillor Noel French it was agreed to amend Section 5.1C of the policy to the following: 
 
“A monument is a lasting tribute to a person, group, or event. The Council must thoroughly assess the 
importance of the subject being commemorated and ensure that the decision to approve such a 
memorial is well-founded and will withstand the test of time. It is therefore considered appropriate 
that the Council will only generally consider commemorating persons who have been deceased for at 
least 10 years and after at least 10 years subsequent to an event taking place.” 
 
The Meath County Council Civic Commemoration Policy, with the amendment as outlined above, 
was unanimously approved on the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy and seconded by 
Councillor Noel French. 
Councillor Ronan Moore noted that the Commemorative Committee should also consider gender 
balance when considering the naming of infrastructure. 
 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian, Helen Meyer, Sean Drew and Alan 
Tobin.  Matters raised included: 
 
Housing: 
 
Housing support applications, response by AHBs to Elected 
Members Reps, AHBs housing adaptations;  
 
Transport: 
 
 
N2 to Rath Roundabout;  
 
Economic Development: 
Support to restaurant industry. 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday, May 6 2025, to consider 
the draft agenda and arrangements for the May Council Meeting.   
 
She noted that the members of the CPG reviewed the Meath County Council Draft 
Commemoration Policy. 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
She further outlined that the reports of Forward Planning and Development SPC, 4th April 
2025, the Climate Action, Environment and Emergency Services SPC, 15th April 2025 and the 
Community & Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC, 30th April 2025 were noted 
and these have been uploaded to the Resources Section of Decision Time. 
 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and 
circulated. 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“What is the current status of funding for upgrading fire stations in County Meath?” 
 
Response: 
 
The National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management (DHLGH) has 
approved upgrade works for the Oldcastle Fire Station, with a maximum 
funding of €915,196. 
 
The Council is in the process of developing a tender framework for 
consultancy services. The upcoming projects in Oldcastle will be sourced 
from this framework. 
 
Plans are in place for the upgrading, remodelling, and extension of additional fire 
stations in Navan, Ashbourne, Kells, and Trim; however, capital funding approvals 
from the Department for these projects have yet to be secured. 
 
Funding for the upgrading of fire stations is included in the Meath 
County Council Capital Investment Programme for the years 2024-2027. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“How many public car park spaces have been removed from each of the six 
Municipal Districts (MDs) in Meath over the last five years, including the 
number of spaces expected to be removed this year and how many disabled 
parking spaces have been added across each MD in the same time frame?” 
 
Response: 
 
Meath County Council Parking Section only retain data on parking spaces in 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
pay and display streets and carparks in Navan Trim and Kells. 
 
The table below outlines the Net Change in Car Parking across the 3 Towns. 
Navan  
  
  
Navan 2030 Project: Pay and Display streets and carparks 
-94 
+4 
Moathill  N51  Park & Ride  Carpark 
+151 
+5 
Garlow Cross  Park & Ride  
+50 
+1 
Total Net Change  
+107 
+10 
Kells  
  
  
Pay and Display streets and carparks 
0 
0 
Pay and display parking spaces converted to parklets and  into  accessible 
parking. 
-7 
+2 
Total Net Change  
-7 
+2 
Trim  
  
  
Pay and display parking spaces converted to parklets  and  into  accessible 
parking. 
-6 
+2 
Free Long -term Carparking Meath County Council Offices Summerhill Rd.  
+20 
+1 
Total Net Change  
+14 
+3 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"In order to better understand the need for emergency housing assistance, the 
Housing Department should gather more detailed demographic information from 
applicants seeking emergency housing assistance. This data should include the 
number of individuals requesting assistance due to reasons such as relationship 
breakdowns, notices to quit, inability to find rental properties, overcrowding, couch 
surfing, addiction, domestic violence, house fires, and rough sleeping. This 
information should be included in the monthly executive report." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Statistics on the numbers of people in emergency accommodation together with 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
the reasons for presentation are prepared and presented at the quarterly Regional 
Homeless Forum meetings with details for Q3 and Q4 for 2024 set out below. Q1 
2025 data will be presented at the next Regional Homeless Forum meeting in June 
and can thereafter be made available to the Members. 
 
The presentation of homeless data in the monthly Management Report is 
currently being reviewed to ensure the information requested by the Members 
can be incorporated. It is anticipated that this review will be completed shortly 
and relevant information included for the June Full Council Meeting. 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduce the motion and welcomed the response above.  She 
further noted the importance of examining trends in the homeless figures.  The motion, 
together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Eddie Fennessy. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"To call on Meath County Council to install signage in public areas such as woods, 
cycle paths, mountain trails, and beaches to educate the public about the dangers of 
Lyme disease. The Lyme Resource Centre will provide these awareness signs at no 
cost. The signs should include information on outdoor tick awareness, along with a 
QR code linking to HSE information." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
It is not within the Transportation Departments remit to erect signs in relation to 
public health, that would be a matter for the HSE. The Transportation Department 
would of course support a HSE run campaign and would accommodate the 
erection of signs if required. However a national information or communication 
campaign by the HSE may be more effective at raising public awareness than the 
placing of signs in rural locations. 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion.  She noted the Executive response and 
proposed an amendment to the motion, seconded by Councillor Eddie Fennessy as follows: 
 
"To call on the HSE to to install signage in public areas such as woods, cycle paths, 
mountain trails, and beaches to educate the public about the dangers of Lyme 
disease. The Lyme Resource Centre will provide these awareness signs at no cost. The 
signs should include information on outdoor tick awareness, along with a QR code 
linking to HSE information." 
 
Councillor Alan Tobin noted that the public should be informed of known locations of 
infected ticks that cause lyme disease.  The motion, as amended, together with supporting 
information, proposed by Councillor Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Eddie 
Fennessy, was unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"To ask the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage if he will ensure 
that all homeless accommodation funded by his Department across the county is 
required to meet minimum standards, including the provision of access to laundry 
and cooking facilities, in order to promote dignity, autonomy, and healthier living 
conditions for individuals and families experiencing homelessness." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Emer Tóibín introduced the motion.  She noted that there should be a minimum 
standard in homeless accommodation to include the provision of access to laundry and 
cooking facilities.  The motion was supported by Councillor Alan Lawes.  The motion, 
together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Emer Tóibín and seconded by Councillor Amanda Smith. 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Minister for Transport and the National Transport Authority to 
request a review of the proposal in the National Cycle Plan Report 2023 and the 
Greater Dublin Area Cycle Network Plan 2023 for the Greenway development 
between Navan and Kells, to extend the route to Oldcastle." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Transport 
and the National Transport Authority. 
 
Councillor Eddie Fennessy introduced the motion.  He outlined the potential to link the 
greenway from Loughcrew to Newgrange.  The motion, together with supporting 
information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy and 
seconded by Councillor Helen Meyer. 
 
9.5 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to request an 
increase in the income threshold and increased funding to expand the Cost Rental 
Scheme in County Meath." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the current 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Scheme. If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Eddie Fennessy introduced the motion.  He noted that the income threshold 
should be standardised across the state.  Councillors Fionnán Blake and Alan Tobin 
supported the motion.  The motion, together with supporting information, was 
unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy and seconded by 
Councillor Fionnán Blake. 
 
9.6 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, seeking an amendment to S.I. No. 73/2022 - Social Housing 
Assessment (Amendment) Regulations 2022, and more specifically Section 3 of the 
prescribed application form for social housing support which requires an applicant to 
provide documented evidence of a legal affidavit signed by “a practicing solicitor”, to 
include a Commissioner of Oaths as an alternative witness to the affidavit.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the current 
Regulations. If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Carol Lennon introduced the Motion.  She noted the costs of applying the 
services of a practising solicitor versus the costs of an affidavit signed by a Commissioner of 
Oaths.  The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the 
proposal of Councillor Carol Lennon and seconded by Councillor Amanda Smith. 
 
9.7 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
"To write to the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to request the 
waiver of fees and the introduction of a grant for coffee shops and restaurants to 
promote outdoor dining and enhance public outdoor spaces, provided that suitable 
space is available in the public realm." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the current 
Scheme. If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Alan Tobin noted that the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
had recently announced the waiver of fees, and he withdrew the motion. 
 
9.8 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
"To write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, to request 
that as part of the conditions for planning applications for new housing estates, 
developers must install Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs); and to further 
request the Minister to consider the opportunity of a grant programme for 
representative bodies of existing residential developments to apply for funding to 
purchase and install AEDs in existing residential developments." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
If the motion is agreed, the Planning Authority will consult with the Forward 
Planning and Development Management SPC regarding the inclusion of planning 
conditions for AEDs in planning decisions, where appropriate. Additionally, Meath 
County Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, in relation to a grant programme for existing residential developments. 
 
Councillor Ronan Moore introduced the motion.  He welcomed the response from the 
Executive.  There were interventions of support from Councillors Noel French, Paddy 
Meade, David Gilroy and Alan Tobin.  The motion, together with supporting information, 
was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Carol Lennon and seconded by 
Councillor Amanda Smith. 
 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Yemi Adenuga 
 
"To write to LMETB to ask that they undertake a feasibility study for a dedicated 
Apprenticeship and Skills Development Centre in County Meath, with the goal of 
establishing the region as a national leader in accessible, industry-aligned vocational 
training." 
 
Councillor Yemi Adenuga introduced the motion.  She noted the number of commuters in 
the County as well as the young population of the County that would benefit by improved 
access to facilities.  There were interventions from Councillors Alan Tobin, Wayne 
Harding, Nick Killian and An Cathaoirleach.  The ongoing work of LMETB in the provision 
of apprenticeship services was noted, including the provision of the state-of-the-art facility 
in Drogheda, Co. Meath.  The motion was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Yemi Adenuga and seconded by Councillor Alan Tobin. 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Noel French 
 
"That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Health requesting adequate 
resources for after-hours mental health services in the Emergency Departments in 
Our Lady’s Hospital, Navan and Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda.” 
 
Councillor Noel French introduced the motion.  He noted the large numbers involved in 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
the recent ‘Darkness into Light’ Campaign and the urgent requirement for out-of-hours 
mental health services at the hospitals in Navan and Drogheda.  The motion was 
unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Noel French and seconded by Councillor 
Sharon Tolan. 
 
10.3 
Submitted by Councillor Gerry O'Connor 
 
“Meath County Council requests that the Minister for Finance and the Minister for 
Public Expenditure and Reform, as part of the Budget discussions, consider reversing 
the pension levy on pension assets, that was implemented during the financial crisis 
from 2013 to 2015.” 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor introduced the motion.  He noted that the initial legislation was 
introduced as an emergency measure which now was no longer warranted.  The motion 
was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor and seconded by 
Councillor Alan Tobin. 
 
10.4 
Submitted by Councillor Gerry O'Connor 
 
“Meath County Council requests the Minister for Finance, as part of the Budget 
proposals, to review the inheritance tax (Capital Acquisition Tax) thresholds, in light 
of increased property values in County Meath” 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor introduced the motion.  He noted the increased values of 
properties in the County and the implications for those who inherit residential properties.  
The motion was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor and 
seconded by Councillor Nick Killian. 
 
10.5 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Transport and the National 
Transport Authority (NTA) seeking that the new “Fairer Fares” be reconsidered in 
circumstances where the youth/child monthly fare and the adult monthly fare have 
increased." 
 
Councillor Carol Lennon introduced the motion.  She noted that in some instances fairs 
had increased under the new ‘fairer fares’ scheme.  The motion was unanimously agreed 
on the proposal of Councillor Carol Lennon and seconded by Councillor Nick Killian. 
 
10.6 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
"Meath County Council calls on the Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy to 
review the current structure of the Community Benefit Fund under the Renewable 
Electricity Support Scheme (RESS) to allow local authorities to administer these funds 
for the direct benefit of local projects and community groups within the respective 
municipal district." 
 

 
 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Councillor Alan Tobin introduced the motion.  He noted that significant sums of community funding 
were being distributed by other not-for-profit organisations.  The motion was unanimously agreed 
on the proposal of Councillor Alan Tobin and seconded by Councillor Paddy Meade. 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian, Brian Fitzgerald, Alan Lawes, Alan Tobin, 
Paddy Meade and Dave Boyne.  Matters raised included the revision and re-zoning of lands in the 
County Development Plan, IPAS Centres, Oireachtas Members’ briefing and availability of minutes of 
council meetings.  An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Sharon Tolan, reminded Councillor Alan Lawes that 
matters raised in the Council Chamber are not considered privileged. 
 
The meeting concluded at 3.05pm 
 
