 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
12th May 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings 
are regulated by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for 
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to 
maintain infection prevention and control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and 
members of the press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand 
hygiene and sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements 
as briefed at the start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the 
Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your 
microphone on mute at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on 7th April 2025 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Community 
 
5.1.1 
To approve the allocations under the Community Grants Scheme 2025 as 
recommended by the Community, Cultural Development and Gaeltacht 
Affairs SPC on April 30, 2025 
 
 
5.1.2 
To approve the allocations under the 2025 Regional Festivals and 
Participative Events – Small Grants Scheme in Co. Meath as recommended 
by Community, Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC on April 30, 
2025 
 
 
5.1.3 
To approve Arts Grants Awards & Bursaries 2025 allocations as 
recommended by the Community, Cultural Development and Gaeltacht 
Affairs SPC on April 30, 2025 
 
 
5.2 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.2.1 
To Consider the Meath County Council Civic Commemoration Policy 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“What is the current status of funding for upgrading fire stations in County Meath?” 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“How many public car park spaces have been removed from each of the six 
Municipal Districts (MDs) in Meath over the last five years, including the number of 
spaces expected to be removed this year and how many disabled parking spaces 
have been added across each MD in the same time frame?” 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"In order to better understand the need for emergency housing assistance, the 
Housing Department should gather more detailed demographic information from 
applicants seeking emergency housing assistance. This data should include the 
number of individuals requesting assistance due to reasons such as relationship 
breakdowns, notices to quit, inability to find rental properties, overcrowding, couch 
surfing, addiction, domestic violence, house fires, and rough sleeping. This 
information should be included in the monthly executive report." 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"To call on Meath County Council to install signage in public areas such as woods, 
cycle paths, mountain trails, and beaches to educate the public about the dangers of 
Lyme disease. The Lyme Resource Centre will provide these awareness signs at no 
cost. The signs should include information on outdoor tick awareness, along with a 
QR code linking to HSE information." 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"To ask the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage if he will ensure 
that all homeless accommodation funded by his Department across the county is 
required to meet minimum standards, including the provision of access to laundry 
and cooking facilities, in order to promote dignity, autonomy, and healthier living 
conditions for individuals and families experiencing homelessness." 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Minister for Transport and the National Transport Authority to 
request a review of the proposal in the National Cycle Plan Report 2023 and the 
Greater Dublin Area Cycle Network Plan 2023 for the Greenway development 
between Navan and Kells, to extend the route to Oldcastle." 
 
9.5 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to request an 
increase in the income threshold and increased funding to expand the Cost Rental 
Scheme in County Meath." 
 
9.6 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, seeking an amendment to S.I. No. 73/2022 - Social Housing 
Assessment (Amendment) Regulations 2022, and more specifically Section 3 of the 
prescribed application form for social housing support which requires an applicant to 
provide documented evidence of a legal affidavit signed by “a practicing solicitor”, to 
include a Commissioner of Oaths as an alternative witness to the affidavit.” 
 
9.7 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
"To write to the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to request the 
waiver of fees and the introduction of a grant for coffee shops and restaurants to 
promote outdoor dining and enhance public outdoor spaces, provided that suitable 
space is available in the public realm." 
 
9.8 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
 
"To write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, to request 
that as part of the conditions for planning applications for new housing estates, 
developers must install Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs); and to further 
request the Minister to consider the opportunity of a grant programme for 
representative bodies of existing residential developments to apply for funding to 
purchase and install AEDs in existing residential developments." 
 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Yemi Adenuga 
 
"To write to LMETB to ask that they undertake a feasibility study for a dedicated 
Apprenticeship and Skills Development Centre in County Meath, with the goal of 
establishing the region as a national leader in accessible, industry-aligned vocational 
training." 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Noel French 
 
"That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Health requesting adequate 
resources for after-hours mental health services in the Emergency Departments in 
Our Lady’s Hospital, Navan and Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda.” 
 
10.3 
Submitted by Councillor Gerry O'Connor 
 
“Meath County Council requests that the Minister for Finance and the Minister for 
Public Expenditure and Reform, as part of the Budget discussions, consider reversing 
the pension levy on pension assets, that was implemented during the financial crisis 
from 2013 to 2015.” 
 
10.4 
Submitted by Councillor Gerry O'Connor 
 
“Meath County Council requests the Minister for Finance, as part of the Budget 
proposals, to review the inheritance tax (Capital Acquisition Tax) thresholds, in light 
of increased property values in County Meath” 
 
10.5 
Submitted by Councillor Carol Lennon 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Transport and the National 
Transport Authority (NTA) seeking that the new “Fairer Fares” be reconsidered in 
circumstances where the youth/child monthly fare and the adult monthly fare have 
increased." 
 
10.6 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
"Meath County Council calls on the Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy to 
review the current structure of the Community Benefit Fund under the Renewable 
Electricity Support Scheme (RESS) to allow local authorities to administer these funds 
for the direct benefit of local projects and community groups within the respective 
municipal district." 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
 
NB Please ensure mobile phones are switched off during council meeting. 
