 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
9th June 2025 @ 2.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Fionnán Blake, Dave Boyne, Mike Bray, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, 
Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, Sean Drew, John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Eddie Fennessy, Brian 
Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel French, Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Suzanne Jamal, 
Geraldine Keogan, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Stephen McKee, Paddy Meade, Helen Meyer, Ronan 
Moore, Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly, Amanda Smith, 
Alan Tobin, Emer Tóibín, Sharon Tolan, Conor Tormey and Maria White. 
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Joe Bonner and Carol Lennon 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona Fallon, Pádraig 
Maguire. 
Senior Executive Officer:  Brian Hora 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
Apologies:  Barry Lynch, Director of Service 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of ordinary meeting held on May 12, 2025 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on May 12, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Nick Killian and seconded by Councillor Joe Fox. 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were none. 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
3.1 
Expressions of Sympathy: 
Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
 
 
The family of the late Martin Phillip (Phil) Cantwell, former Councillor. 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
 
Noel Leonard, former Councillor, on the death of his son, Barry Leonard. 
 
 
The family of the late Bernard Jnr Power. 
 
Amy Jordan, Corporate Affairs and Governance, on the death of her father, David (Dave) 
Jordan. 
 
3.2 
Expressions of Congratulations: 
Expressions of congratulations were extended to: 
 
Councillor Brian Fitzgerald, who celebrates 40 years’ service with Meath County Council. 
 
Hailey Twomey from Eureka Secondary School, Kells, named Girls’ Under-15 Schools 
International Player of the Year. 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
There were none. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
To adopt the Annual Report 2024 
The Chief Executive outlined the salient details of the report.  The Annual Report 2024 was 
adopted on the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Nick Killian 
and unanimously agreed. 
 
5.1.2 
Appointment of Councillor to Meath Comhairle na nÓg Steering 
Committee following the resignation of Cllr Stephen McKee 
On the proposal of Councillor Paddy Meade and seconded by Councillor Sharon Tolan, it 
was agreed to defer this matter to the July Council meeting. 
 
5.2 
Finance 
 
5.2.1 
To note the Quarterly Financial Statement as at 31st March 2025 
The Elected Members noted the report. 
 
5.3 
Community 
 
5.3.1 
To approve the nomination of Michael Gunn from Coastwatch to fill the 
vacant PPN Environment Pillar position on the Meath LCDC. 
On the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher, 
the nomination of Michael Gunn from Coastwatch to fill the vacant PPN Environment Pillar 
position on the Meath LCDC was unanimously agreed. 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian, Maria Murphy, Sharon Tolan, Alan Lawes, 
Helen Meyer and David Gilroy.  Matters raised included: 
 
Housing: 
Housing needs assessment and strategy, social housing stock, processing social 
housing applications, independent living units, homeless accommodation, tenant 
purchase scheme,  
 
Transport: 
Funding for Active Travel projects, 
 
Planning: 
Section 5 applications, public realm plans, temporary dwellings (cabins) 
 
Responses were provided by Fiona Fallon, Padraig Maguire and Martin Murray. 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Tuesday June 3 2025, to consider the draft 
agenda and arrangements for the Annual Meeting and the June Council Meeting.   
 
She noted that the CPG members reviewed the Meath County Council Annual Report 2024. In 
addition, she noted that the CPG had approved the ICT Acceptable Usage Policy for Elected 
Members and implemented the Council’s retention policy for Elected Members’ emails, details of 
which were circulated to the Elected Members. 
 
She further outlined that the reports of the Housing and Integration SPC meeting held on 17th April 
2025 and the Transportation & Urban Regeneration SPC meeting held on 27th May 2025 were 
noted.  In addition, the work programmes of the Climate Action, Environment and Emergency 
Services SPC and the Forward Planning and Development Management SPC were approved and have 
been uploaded to the Resources Section of Decision Time. 
 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“To ask the executive to please give an update regarding the availability of grants to 
upgrade and repair septic tanks to all households that cannot avail of a public 
sewage scheme, for repairs and upgrade to improve our water quality across Co 
Meath?” 
 
Response: 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Meath County Council administers the Domestic Waste Water Treatment Grants 
Scheme on behalf of the Department of Housing, Local Government and Housing in 
accordance with the Housing (Domestic Waste Water Treatment Systems (DWWTS) 
Financial Assistance) Regulations 2023 (S.I. No. 562 of 2023). 
 
Following an inspection by Meath County Council in accordance with the EPA’s 
National Inspection Plan the Council may pay a grant to a person for the carrying out 
of remediation, repair or upgrading works to, or replacement of a DWWTS. 
 
In order to qualify for the grant, the house served by the DWWTS must, in the 
opinion of the local authority: 
 
a) 
be occupied by the applicant as their primary place of residence (e.g. not a 
holiday home), 
 
b) 
not be connected to a public sewerage scheme, 
 
c) 
not be currently under construction or constructed within the last 7 years, 
  
d) 
not have been paid a grant for the DWWTS within the last 7 years, and 
 
e) 
have all works completed satisfactorily in accordance with the Advisory  
Notice 
 
The level of grant available is 85% of the approved cost of the works, subject to a 
maximum of €12,000. There is no minimum value in respect of costs. 
 
Further details can be viewed on : https://www.meath.ie/council/council-
services/drinking-water- and-waste-water/waste-water/domestic-septic-tanks 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“To ask the council to provide the cumulative number of housing applications that 
have not been processed to date in 2025?” 
 
Response: 
 
During 2024, 1700 applications for social housing were received by the Housing 
Department. Of these, 697 were deemed eligible for social housing supports, 225 
were deemed ineligible and 778 required additional information before a 
determination could be made on eligibility. Similarly in 2025, the number of 
applications for social housing supports being made to Meath County Council 
remains high, with an average of 148 applications received monthly. By the end of 
May, 744 applications were received, 250 were deemed eligible for social housing 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
supports and 124 were deemed ineligible. At present, there are 253 applications 
awaiting processing. 
 
Councillor Meyer queried the figures as outlined and it was agreed that clarification would be 
provided separately. 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Sean Drew 
 
"Please outline Meath County Councils current planning policy, in relation to the 
development of modular or cabin type dwelling units within the curtilage of existing 
residential houses?" 
 
Response: 
 
The Meath County Development Plan 2021-2027 does not contain a specific policy 
for the development of modular or cabin type dwellings within the curtilage of 
existing residential houses. The Development Plan contains objectives for infill 
development (defined as development situated in gaps between existing buildings in 
built-up urban areas), backland development (defined as small scale development 
located to the rear of existing buildings in built up areas) and corner/side garden site 
development. It also contains specific development management standards for new 
dwellings addressing issues such as car and cycle parking requirements, private open 
space provision, bin storage. Applications for modular/cabin type dwellings would 
be assessed in terms of compliance with those standards and objectives. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Suzanne Jamal 
  
“I call on Meath County Council to hold a “Menopause Day” workshop to educate 
and inform women and men of the changes that happen as a woman ages. For far 
too long this was not spoken about. Meath County Council can lead on “the change” 
and make more information available through various channels to open up 
conversation on this very important life change.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Meath County Council acknowledges that menopause is a significant life stage with 
various impacts. Our Healthy Meath programme is committed to promoting public 
health and well-being, aligning with the Health Ireland (HI) national policy on health 
information and awareness. 
 
In the coming weeks, two women's health talks are scheduled for Bettystown and 
Oldcastle libraries under the Period Poverty initiative. In 2024, three women's health 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
talks were delivered: two in Family Resource Centres (Laytown & Trim) and one with 
the Travellers Workshop. 
 
If the motion is agreed, the Council will support the initiative with Meath Women's 
Caucus. 
 
Councillor Suzanne Jamal introduced the motion and welcomed the response above.  She 
outlined details of her own experience and the importance of education and opportunities 
for further discussion.  There were interventions of support from Councillors Maria 
Murphy, Sharon Tolan, Yemi Adenuga, Gerry O’Connor and An Cathaoirleach.  The 
motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal 
of Councillor Suzanne Jamal and seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Michael Gallagher 
 
“That Meath County Council proactively deliver residential homes in villages in rural 
villages in Meath, with the construction of social and affordable housing and 
provision of private building sites in the villages.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
The Council engages with Private Developers ensuring that they meet their Part V 
obligation. With the 20% Part V requirement, a minimum of 10% are delivered as 
social and the remainder as affordable purchase. Meath County Council has a rolling 
Expressions of Interest for the provision of suitable sites for purchase to deliver 
social and affordable units. All decisions to purchase land are based on the demand 
on the social housing list. 
 
Meath County Council's County Development Plan contains a range of policies and 
objectives that support delivery of housing in rural villages. 
 
Councillor Michael Gallagher introduced the motion.  He outlined the difficulties associated with 
rural regeneration and the provision of essential infrastructure to support housing.  There were 
interventions of support from Councillors Paddy Meade, Mike Bray and Joe Fox.  The motion, 
together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Michael Gallagher and seconded by Councillor Paddy Meade. 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“That the council notify Councillors of all upcoming roadworks in their MD so that 
they can notify residents to make alternative travel arrangements.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
All Cllr’s receive an email with the “roadworks Programme for Week Commencing     
/     / 
” each Friday in advance of the proposed works. 
 
For Road Closures all Councillors are notified by email at both Intention to Close & 
Closure stages. 
 
For Road Opening Licences (ROL), we do not notify Councillors when a ROL is 
granted as the volume of granted licences in 2024 was 2,399. If we were to notify 
the Cllrs of every Road opening licence, there would be a huge amount of additional 
work for both the MD Engineers and the Admin staff. 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Fionnan Blake.  
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion and provided clarification that the motion referred 
to roadworks that require traffic management.  There were interventions from Councillors Gerry 
O’Connor, Mike Bray, and Nick Killian, each expressing concern about the large volume of 
communications that would be generated.  Councillor Meyer withdrew the motion and agreed to 
revert to the Director of Services for Transport to agree on a suitable process going forward. 
 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“To write to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to contribute to the 
15% contribution required under the LIS scheme for improvements to non-public 
roads, over which this department has a right of way.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and 
considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the current 
Scheme. If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for 
Agriculture, Food and the Marine. 
 
Councillor Yvonne Everard withdrew the motion. 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Transport and the N.T.A. 
requesting extra buses and trains are added to their timetables for large crowd 
events in Dublin City.” 
 
Councillor Fionnan Blake introduced the motion.  He outlined his experience in using public 
transport during the recent Leinster SFC Final.  The motion was unanimously agreed on the proposal 
of Councillor Fionnan Blake and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 

 
 
        
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
"To write to the Minister for Justice to address the issue of private companies 
operating traffic management on public roads without the necessary permits in 
place." 
 
Councillor Yvonne Everard introduced the motion.  She provided details of the statutory 
requirements as outlined by the HSA and noted recent experiences with long traffic delays.  There 
were interventions from Councillors Padraig Fitzsimons and Emer Tóibín, with clarification being 
sought in relation to the impact on hedge cutting, etc.  Councillor Everard agreed to amend the 
motion to reference traffic management on regional and secondary roads, which was agreed by 
Councillor Tóibín, as follows: 
 
"To write to the Minister for Justice to address the issue of private companies 
operating traffic management on regional and secondary roads without the 
necessary permits in place." 
 
The motion, as amended, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Yvonne Everard 
and seconded by Councillor Emer Tóibín. 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Sarah Reilly, Sean Drew, Michael Gallagher, Brian 
Fitzgerald and Emer Tóibín regarding the recent announcement by Wellman International to place 
its operation in Mullagh into examinership.  It was agreed that the matter would be considered at 
the forthcoming meeting of the Economic Development SPC. 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Dave Boyne and Nick Killian regarding water services in 
Trim and social housing in Ashbourne. 
 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.40pm 
