 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
9th June 2025 @ 2.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings 
are regulated by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for 
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to 
maintain infection prevention and control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and 
members of the press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand 
hygiene and sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements 
as briefed at the start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the 
Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your 
microphone on mute at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on May 12, 2025 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
Notice of Motion 9.4 - May 2025 
 
"To write to the Minister for Transport and the National Transport Authority to request a 
review of the proposal in the National Cycle Plan Report 2023 and the Greater Dublin Area 
Cycle Network Plan 2023 for the Greenway development between Navan and Kells, to 
extend the route to Oldcastle." 
 
Response received from the National Transport Authority advising that the 
development of greenways largely falls under the remit of Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland (TII) and MCC has forwarded it to them. 
 
Notice of Motion 9.8 - May 2025 
 
"To write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, to request that as 
part of the conditions for planning applications for new housing estates, developers must 
install Automated External Defibrillators(AEDs); and to further request the Minister to 
consider the opportunity of a grant programme for representative bodies of existing 
residential developments to apply for funding to purchase and install AEDs in existing 
residential developments." 
 
Response received that the matter should be referred to the Minister for Health and we 
have done so. 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
To adopt the Annual Report 2024 
 
5.1.2 
Appointment of Councillor to Meath Comhairle na nÓg Steering Committee 
following the resignation of Cllr Stephen McKee 
 
5.2 
Finance 
 
5.2.1 
To note the Quarterly Financial Statement as at 31st March 2025 
 
5.3 
Community 
 
5.3.1 
To approve the nomination from Coastwatch to fill the vacant PPN 
Environment Pillar position on the Meath LCDC 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“To ask the executive to please give an update regarding the availability of grants to 
upgrade and repair septic tanks to all households that cannot avail of a public 
sewage scheme, for repairs and upgrade to improve our water quality across Co 
Meath?” 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“To ask the council to provide the cumulative number of housing applications that 
have not been processed to date in 2025?” 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Sean Drew 
 
"Please outline Meath County Councils current planning policy, in relation to the 
development of modular or cabin type dwelling units within the curtilage of existing 
residential houses?" 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Suzanne Jamal 
  
“I call on Meath County Council to hold a “Menopause Day” workshop to educate 
and inform women and men of the changes that happen as a woman ages. For far 
too long this was not spoken about. Meath County Council can lead on “the change” 
and make more information available through various channels to open up 
conversation on this very important life change.” 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Michael Gallagher 
 
“That Meath County Council proactively deliver residential homes in villages in rural 
villages in Meath, with the construction of social and affordable housing and 
provision of private building sites in the villages.” 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
“That the council notify Councillors of all upcoming roadworks in their MD so that 
they can notify residents to make alternative travel arrangements.” 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“To write to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to contribute to the 
15% contribution required under the LIS scheme for improvements to non-public 
roads, over which this department has a right of way.” 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
 
“That Meath County Council writes to the Minister for Transport and the N.T.A. 
requesting extra buses and trains are added to their timetables for large crowd 
events in Dublin City.” 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
"To write to the Minister for Justice to address the issue of private companies 
operating traffic management on public roads without the necessary permits in 
place." 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
 
 
NB Please ensure mobile phones are switched off during council meeting. 
