 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
7th July 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings 
are regulated by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for 
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to 
maintain infection prevention and control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and 
members of the press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand 
hygiene and sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements 
as briefed at the start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the 
Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your 
microphone on mute at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons 
present who are not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Annual meeting held on June 9, 2025 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on June 9, 2025 
 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.0164Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at Donore, Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 21st 
May 2025. 
 
4.2 
To consider the disposal of 0.0049Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold 
interest at Cakestown Glebe, Kells, Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory 
Notice dated 16th May 2025. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
Appointment of Councillor to Meath Comhairle na nÓg Steering Committee 
following the resignation of Cllr Stephen McKee 
 
5.1.2 
Appointment of Councillor to the Regional Health Forum following the 
resignation of Cllr Sarah Reilly 
 
 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
5.2 
Finance 
 
5.2.1 
To consider the report of the Chief Executive prepared in accordance with 
the provisions of the Local Property Tax (Local Adjustment Factor) 
Regulations 2022 
 
For the purpose of resolving as follows: 
 
a) Vary the basic rate and set a local adjustment factor that will apply for a 
period as specified by the resolution, or 
 
b) Not vary the basic rate 
 
5.3 
Community 
 
5.3.1 
To approve funding allocations to community groups/organisations under 
the Carranstown Environmental Projects Grant Scheme as recommended by 
the Elected Members of the Laytown-Bettystown Municipal District. 
 
 
5.4 
Planning 
 
5.4.1 
To consider the Chief Executive’s Report in accordance with Section  13 of 
the Planning & Development Act, as amended, on submissions to Proposed 
Variation No. 4 to the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 2027, and to 
consider making, not making or modifying the Proposed Variation. 
 
Variation No. 4 comprises the replacement of the Maynooth Environs 
Written Statement in the Meath CDP 2021-2027 with the adopted 
Maynooth Joint LAP 2025-2031 Written Statement. 
 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
"To ask the executive to provide a summary of upcoming funding application that 
are available to all communities in the Co Meath area for 2025?" 
 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Sean Drew 
 
"Please provide in tabular format a schedule detailing the location and size of the 41 
sites of zoned development lands owned by Meath County Council that were liable to 
RZLT 
during 
May 2025 
of 
€498,600. Please 
also 
list 
the 
stage 
of 
design/planning/construction for residential development, that each of these 41 
Meath County Council owned sites is currently." 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“How many unresolved cases are Planning Enforcement currently dealing with?” 
 
8.4 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
 
"Could Meath County Council give an update on its plans to move community grant 
applications online and time-lines related to this?" 
 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Lawes 
 
“I am calling on Meath County Council to ensure that all emergency accommodation 
facilities have a current fire certificate.” 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
“That Meath County Council amends the design of parking tickets issued from its 
public parking machines to include an adhesive strip or section, similar to those used 
in other local authorities, to allow motorists to securely affix the ticket to the inside 
of their vehicle windscreen. This small change would ensure better visibility for traffic 
wardens, reduce the number of disputed fines due to dislodged or misplaced tickets, 
and improve the overall efficiency of parking enforcement across the county.” 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1  
Submitted by Councillor Sean Drew 
 
"That this Council supports the call for the creation of a National Public Holiday in 
honour of St Colmcille and, if the motion is agreed, Meath County Council will write 
to the Minister of Enterprise, Tourism & Employment." 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Yvonne Everard 
 
“In instances where the Department of Agriculture holds a right of way over a road, 
they should be responsible for funding the maintenance of the road, rather than 
residents having to rely on the provisions of a Local Improvement Scheme (LIS).” 
 

 
 
        
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
 
 
 
NB Please ensure mobile phones are switched off during council meeting. 
