 
 
 
 
 
 
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
1st September 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Hybrid Meeting 
This meeting is a hybrid meeting, Elected Members may attend in-person or online. These meetings are regulated 
by the Council’s Standing Orders. 
 
Public Health Guidance 
This meeting is being held in line with the Transitional Protocol – Good Practice Guidance for Continuing to Prevent 
the Spread of COVID-19, which outlines advice and best practice guidance to maintain infection prevention and 
control and other measures for the safe operating of workplaces.   
 
Please note the following: 
• 
Attendance at Buvinda House is open to Elected Members, designated Council officials and members of the 
press and public; 
• 
The wearing of a face-mask is not required but may be worn. 
 
Meeting attendees are requested to: 
• 
Adhere to public health best practice in relation to cough and sneeze etiquette and hand hygiene and 
sanitation; 
• 
Adhere to meeting and venue housekeeping arrangements including fire safety arrangements as briefed at the 
start of the meeting;  
• 
Refrain from bringing food or drink, except bottled water, into the meeting room; 
• 
Adhere to information displayed on signage and to the advice of meeting staff. 
 
Online Attendance – Please Note: 
 
 
 
 
Turn on your camera 
Ensure your microphone is on 
mute 
Use the ‘Hand Function’ to ask 
for the floor and for voting 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
For Members: 
• 
If you wish to speak you should use the Hand function – you’ll be given the floor by the Cathaoirleach. 
• 
This Hand function will also be used for voting, unless a roll call vote is used. 
For All Participants: 
• 
All participants must have their camera on during the meeting and you should have your microphone on mute 
at all times, unless called upon by the Cathaoirleach to speak 
• 
It is the personal responsibility of all participants to ensure that there are no other persons present who are 
not entitled to be present for this meeting 
• 
Recording of the meeting or any part thereof is not permitted. 
 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on July 7, 2025 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 
183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
Appointment of additional Councillor to the Regional Health Forum - Dublin North East 
 
5.1.2 
To resolve to hold a Council Meeting on 22nd September 2025 at 9.30am (hybrid) to 
consider the nomination of presidential candidates, pending confirmation of Presidential 
Order 
 
5.2 
Community 
 
5.2.1 
To approve a nomination to fill the vacant Social Inclusion Pillar seat on Meath LCDC 
 
5.3 
Finance 
 
5.3.1 
To note the Half Year Financial Statement as at 30th June 2025 
 
5.4 
Planning 
 
5.4.1 
NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
 
7.0        Correspondence 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Nick Killian 
 
  “Can Meath County Council please outline the role of Councillors in the decision making of “Urban    
Development zones” as set out in the Planning and Development Act (as amended)?" 
 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"What is the year-on-year increase in housing units since 2022, and have the maintenance staff 
numbers increased alongside this growth?" 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
“To ask the Executive to work with the An Garda Síochaná to implement the ‘See Something, Say 
Something’ text alert service in Meath, to help combat illegal dumping and anti-social behaviour 
in the county.” 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Noel French 
 
"That Meath County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to 
remove the section 5 provision for IPAS centres and ensure that all IPAS centres follow the standard 
planning process." 
 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to: 
 
Withdraw all planning exemptions currently in place for properties being used to accommodate 
International Protection Applicants, so that such properties are subject to the standard planning 
process in line with all other forms of development and use." 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to: 
 
Request that the Community Engagement Team within the Department of Justice engage with local 
communities in advance of any contracts being signed for International Protection Accommodation, 
ensuring that communities are properly informed and consulted in a timely and transparent 
manner." 
 
9.5 
Submitted by Councillor Sharon Tolan 
"To call on Meath County Council to introduce an annual Sports Bursary Programme, in order to 
support our local elite and/or high performance sportspeople and assist with the financial burden of 
training and competing locally, nationally or internationally.” 
9.6 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
"That Meath County Council writes to the Department of Housing to request increased and multi- 
annual funding for the local authority Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme, in order to more 
effectively reach national climate targets and deliver much-needed regeneration to social housing in 
the area." 
9.7 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
"In light of the Electoral Commission’s first-ever Oversight Report published in May 2025 which 
highlighted the need for improved completeness and accuracy of electoral registers nationally, I call 
on Meath County Council to launch a major electoral register update campaign." 
9.8 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
“I call on Meath County Council to write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to request an increase in the income threshold for the Mortgage to Rent Scheme, adopted 
by Meath County Council in 2021.” 
 
9.9 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“Given recent figures which show no IDA visits to North Meath and a poor overall ranking for 
Meath, I call on Meath County Council to address this by prioritising investment in infrastructure 
and skills to sustain future employment from both local and multinational companies.” 
 
9.10 Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"To ask the Housing Department to implement a specific protocol when contacting individuals on 
the housing list to verify their ongoing need for housing. This protocol should include sending an 
email first, followed by a letter, and then making a phone call, in that order. The current practice 
of sending a letter and making a phone call is inadequate, as neither method is traceable, leading 
to unnecessary disputes. It is crucial that every effort is made to reach an individual before they 
are removed from the housing list." 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Clár / Meeting Agenda 
 
 
9.11 Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"That the Council include a searchable database in the monthly executive report that contains all 
motions and questions submitted by Members to date. This database should include the 
following details: the question submitted and the corresponding answer, the date the motion 
was submitted, the current status of the motion, and the date the motion was closed." 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Office of An Taoiseach, to ask that the Irish Government plan and prepare for 
Irish unity through the following actions: 
 
 
Establish an all-island Citizens’ Assembly and a Joint Oireachtas Committee 
on Irish Unity 
Produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic society and 
key stakeholders, including local government 
Work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the Good Friday 
Agreement.” 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
 
 
12.0   
Any Other Business 
