 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
1st September 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Mike Bray, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, 
Francis Deane, Sean Drew, John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Eddie Fennessy, Brian Fitzgerald, Joe Fox, Noel French, 
David Gilroy, Suzanne Jamal, Geraldine Keogan, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Paddy Meade, Helen Meyer, 
Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly, Amanda Smith, Alan Tobin, Sharon 
Tolan and Maria White 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillors Dave Boyne, Padraig Fitzsimons, Michael Gallagher, Stephen McKee, Ronan Moore, Emer Tóibín, and 
Conor Tormey.  
 
Apologies:   
Councillors  
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Martin Murray, Fiona Fallon, Gareth McMahon, 
Gerry Boyle 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
Apologies:  Barry Lynch, Director of Service 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on July 7, 2025 
 
The minutes of the Annual meeting held on July 7, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of Councillor Francis 
Deane and seconded by Councillor Nick Killian. 
 
2.0  
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were none. 
 
Councillor Alan Lawes proposed suspending standing orders to discuss a notice of motion that had not been 
included on the Agenda of the Council Meeting.  Councillor Dave Boyne seconded the proposal. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor proposed that the Council proceed to the next business.  This proposal was seconded by 
Councillor Maria Murphy. 
 
On a show of hands vote it was agreed to proceed to the next business, with 18 members in agreement, 12 
members not in agreement and no abstentions. 
 
3.0 Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations 
3.1  
Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
 
Adrienne Ring-Clarke, Planning and Gráinne Clarke, Facilities on the death of their husband/brother Padraig 
Clarke, Transportation. 
 
The family of the late Peter Smyth, former employee. 
 
Carina Smyth, Arts Office on the death of her father, Des Smyth. 
 
Pat Woods, Kells MD on the death of his brother, Kevin Woods. 
 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 
183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
There were none. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
Appointment of additional Councillor to the Regional Health Forum - Dublin North East 
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry O’Connor, seconded by Councillor Nick Killian, it was agreed to 
defer this matter to the October Council meeting. 
 
5.1.2 
To resolve to hold a Council Meeting on 22nd September 2025 at 9.30am (hybrid) to 
consider the nomination of presidential candidates, pending confirmation of Presidential 
Order 
On the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy, seconded by Councillor Sharon Tolan, it was agreed 
to hold a Council meeting on 22nd September 2025 at 9.30am (hybrid) to consider the nomination 
of presidential candidates, subject to the Presidential Order being made. 
 
5.2 
Community 
 
5.2.1 
To approve a nomination to fill the vacant Social Inclusion Pillar seat on Meath LCDC 
Marie Brennan, Meath Alzheimer's Café 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
On the proposal of Councillor Eddie Fennessy and seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy, it was 
agreed to approve the nomination of Marie Brennan, Meath Alzheimer’s Café, to fill the vacant 
Social Inclusion Pillar seat on Meath LCDC. 
 
5.3 
Finance 
 
5.3.1 
To note the Half Year Financial Statement as at 30th June 2025 
Ms. Fiona Lawless, Director of Finance, provided an overview of the half year financial statement.  
It was noted that debt. collection levels remained strong. 
The report was noted by the Elected Members. 
 
5.4 
Planning 
 
5.4.1 
NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements 
The Chief Executive provided the salient details of the report and set out the implications for the 
Meath County Development Plan.  He noted that a briefing workshop had been scheduled for the 
Elected Members.   
 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Sean Drew, Brian Fitzgerald, Maria 
Murphy, Eugene Cassidy, Alan Tobin and Gerry O’Connor.  The Members broadly welcomed the 
report and noted their support for housing delivery.  The requirements for appropriate 
infrastructure and amenities to support an increased population in the County were also noted. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian, Helen Meyer, Eddie Fennessy, Maria Murphy, 
Alan Tobin, Stephen McKee, Alan Lawes, Sharon Tolan, Sean Drew and David Gilroy. 
 
Matters raised included: 
 
Planning: 
Numbers of commencement notices received, planning requirements for SEAI grant works, 
Masterplan for Employment Lands in Dunboyne, Heritage Week and Draft Biodiversity Plan. 
 
Housing: 
Volume of social housing applications, use of lands at Ashbourne, social housing vacancies, 
AHB social housing delivery, affordable housing Ratoath, standards in emergency 
accommodation and housing adaptations grants funding. 
 
Transport: 
NTA funding for works in Ratoath, design proposals for Balrath Cross, Active Travel 
Schemes, Safe Route to School Schemes, Bus Stop Enhancement Programme, Footpath 
Rehabilitation Programme, N2 roadworks, R125 roadworks, public lighting programme, 
Boyne Greenway, Beamore Road junction and national speed limit review. 
 
Economic 
Development: Proposals for Bremore Port. 
 
Community: Community Amenity Fund. 
 
Responses to queries raised were provided by Directors of Service Gerry Boyle, Fiona Fallon, Dara 
McGowan, Martin Murray and Gareth McMahon. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday, August 25, 2025, to consider the draft 
agenda and arrangements for the September Council Meeting.   
 
She noted that the CPG members had considered correspondence from Mr. Kieran O’Hanlon, President of 
AILG and supported his request to include an Update on the Local Government Task Force as a Standing 
Item on the Council Agenda until the process has concluded. 
 
She further noted that the CPG members were updated on the recently published guidance on the 
operation of the Local Community Safety Partnerships, and it was noted that the inaugural meeting would 
be due to take place in November. 
 
She further outlined that the reports of the Forward Planning and Development Management SPC of the 
4th July 2025, the Climate Action, Environment and Emergency Services SPC, of 8th July 2025 and the 
Housing and Integration SPC of 17th July 202 approved and uploaded to the Resources Section of Decision 
Time. 
 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
 
7.0        Correspondence 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Nick Killian 
 
“Can Meath County Council please outline the role of Councillors in the decision making of “Urban 
Development zones” as set out in the Planning and Development Act (as amended)?" 
 
Response: 
 
Urban Development Zones (UDZs) fall under Part 22 of the Planning and Development Act 2024. 
 
Circular Letter 2025/01 issued to Local Authorities on 06 June 2025 outlined Commencement Order 2025 
(S.I No. 239 of 2025) which formally commences Chapter 1 (Preliminary and General Interpretations) and  
 
Chapter 2 (Suitable sites) and came into effect on 09 June 2025. All other remaining Chapters of the new 
2024 Act relating to UDZs have not yet commenced. A copy of this circular and the Commencement Order 
are published online at www.gov.ie/planning 
 
Urban Development Zones can be designated by request from the Minister, through the Local Authority 
identification of appropriate sites and/or through the Development Plan Review Process. Public 
Consultation is required at various stages for both designation of a UDZ as well as all draft scheme in 
accordance with the UDZ Order. A CE Report is also required on a Draft UDZ Scheme which is brought 
before the members for their consideration and approval. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"What is the year-on-year increase in housing units since 2022, and have the maintenance staff 
numbers increased alongside this growth?" 
 
Response: 
Housing Stock has increased from 2,862 to 4,649 during the period from 2021 to 2025. 
• 
2025 = 222 to date 
• 
2024 = 556 
• 
2023 = 518 
• 
2022 = 491 
The maintenance demand with newly constructed houses is minimal except for the annual service 
checks that must be carried out.  It should also be noted that the budget for housing maintenance 
increases year on year based on the housing stock numbers.  There has also been substantial 
investment in carrying out energy retrofits and stock condition surveys to the existing housing stock 
with the results of the stock conditions surveys helping inform a programme of planned 
maintenance.  Accordingly, the staffing numbers in Housing Maintenance have increased from 7 to 
13 since 2022. 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
“To ask the Executive to work with the An Garda Síochaná to implement the ‘See Something, Say 
Something’ text alert service in Meath, to help combat illegal dumping and anti-social behaviour 
in the county.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
“See Something, Say Something” is an initiative of An Garda Síochána. The Local Community 
Safety Partnership (which will include An Garda Síochána) is due to be established in Meath 
later this year and will be an ideal forum to consider the extension of the ‘See Something, Say 
Something’ initiative to Meath. 
 
In the absence of this scheme in Meath at present, people can report crime or 
incidents confidentially through; 
Garda Confidential Line, Free-phone 1800 666 111 
Traffic Watch (a partnership approach to report incidents relating to road safety, to 
help make our roads safer for all.) 
Traffic Watch Online Reporting - Garda 
 
 
Councillor Eddie Fennessy introduced the motion and welcomed the response. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Eddie Fennessy and seconded by Councillor Fionnán Blake. 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Noel French 
 
"That Meath County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to 
remove the section 5 provision for IPAS centres and ensure that all IPAS centres follow the standard 
planning process." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the Planning and Development 
Act (as amended). If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Noel French introduced the motion.  He noted that the absence of a planning process removes 
consultation and erodes trust in the planning process. 
 
There were interventions of support from Councillors Sean Drew, Alan Tobin, Alan Lawes and Dave Boyne.  
The motion, together with supporting information, proposed by Councillor Noel French and seconded by 
Councillor Nick Killian, was unanimously agreed by the Elected Members. 
 
9.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to: 
 
Withdraw all planning exemptions currently in place for properties being used to accommodate 
International Protection Applicants, so that such properties are subject to the standard planning 
process in line with all other forms of development and use." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
Meath County Council complies with the requirements set out in the Planning and Development 
Act (as amended). If the motion is agreed, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage. 
 
Councillor Emer Tóibín introduced the motion, noting the interventions from the previous motion.  There 
were interventions from Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Dave Boyne, Gerry O’Connor, Sean Drew and Padraig 
Coffey, Joe Bonner.  While the members expressed support for the overall premise of the motion, concerns 
were raised regarding the potential impact on the current occupied IPAS centres. 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor proposed an amendment, which was seconded by Councillor Sharon Tolan and 
agreed as follows: 
 
That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to review 
all planning exemptions currently in place for properties being used to accommodate International 
Protection Applicants, so that such properties are subject to the standard planning process in line 
with all other forms of development and use. 
 
The motion, as amended, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Emer Tóibín and 
seconded by Councillor Yemi Adenuga. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
9.4 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibín 
 
"That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to: 
 
Request that the Community Engagement Team within the Department of Justice engage with local 
communities in advance of any contracts being signed for International Protection Accommodation, 
ensuring that communities are properly informed and consulted in a timely and transparent 
manner." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
Subject to the motion being agreed the Council will write to the Community Engagement Team 
(CET) of the Department of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, as requested. 
 
It should be noted that, the CET welcomes queries related to any existing or proposed centre of 
accommodation, from elected representatives, community stakeholders or the media. The 
Community Engagement Team endeavour to respond as appropriate to communications or queries 
they receive. 
 
Their contact details are as follows: CommunityEngagement@justice.ie 
 
Councillor Emer Tóibín introduced the motion, noting that a lack of communication can fuel 
misinformation.  There were interventions from Councillors Gerry O’Connor and Dave Boyne. 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor proposed an amendment, which was seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy as 
follows: 
 
That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs, and Migration to request 
that the Community Engagement Team within the Department of Justice engage with local 
communities, ensuring that communities are properly informed and consulted in a timely and 
transparent manner. 
 
The amended motion, proposed by Councillor Emer Tóibín and seconded by Councillor Yemi Adenuga, was 
agreed by a show of hands vote with 19 members in agreement, 12 members not in agreement and no 
abstentions. 
 
9.5 
Submitted by Councillor Sharon Tolan 
"To call on Meath County Council to introduce an annual Sports Bursary Programme, in order to 
support our local elite and/or high performance sportspeople and assist with the financial burden of 
training and competing locally, nationally or internationally.” 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
Meath County Council provides significant financial funding and support to Meath Sports 
Partnership and to a number of sporting bodies, organisations and initiatives across the county. 
Various sports organisations and Sports Ireland offer both bursaries and scholarships to athletes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
Councillor Sharon Tolan introduced the motion.  She noted that amateur athletes represent the County 
with distinction and can often run into financial difficulties due to commitments with work, study etc. 
There were interventions from Councillors Maria Murphy, Nick Killian, Noel French, Brian Fitzgerald, 
Ronan Moore, Joe Bonner, Alan Tobin, Gerry O’Connor, David Gilroy and Yvonne Everard.  While the 
Elected Members supported the premise of the motion, it was noted that the motion required further 
consideration in terms of budgetary constraints, eligibility, and the impact on funding for local sports 
groups and Meath Sports Partnership. 
On the proposal of Councillor David Gilroy, seconded by Councillor Sean Drew it was unanimously agreed 
to refer the motion to the Community and Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC. 
9.6 
Submitted by Councillor Ronan Moore 
"That Meath County Council writes to the Department of Housing to request increased and multi- 
annual funding for the local authority Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme, in order to more 
effectively reach national climate targets and deliver much-needed regeneration to social housing in 
the area." 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
If the Motion is agreed, Meath County Council will write to the Department of Housing to request 
increased and multi-annual funding for the local authority Energy Efficiency Retrofitting 
Programme. 
Councillor Ronan Moore introduced the motion.  He noted that further energy retrofit works were 
required in order to meet climate action targets.  Councillor Alan Tobin supported the motion. 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Ronan Moore and seconded by Councillor Alan Tobin. 
 
9.7 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
"In light of the Electoral Commission’s first-ever Oversight Report published in May 2025 which 
highlighted the need for improved completeness and accuracy of electoral registers nationally, I call 
on Meath County Council to launch a major electoral register update campaign." 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
The electorate for County Meath is currently 165,692. The Electoral Commission report in May 
2025 has identified some gaps in the data on the Meath register which generally relate to data 
collected prior to the requirement for Eircodes , PPSNs, emails, etc. 
Due to the transient nature of the current population and this county’s proximity to Dublin, 
registration details need to be constantly updated, and the Registration Authority is dependent to a 
large extent on engagement from the electors. 
The introduction of the online registration portal in 2022, accessed via checktheregister.ie has 
made registering to vote more accessible now than ever. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
Many national public relation campaigns, supported by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage, promoting registration have taken place in the last couple of years. 
Some of the public relations initiatives/events undertaken locally in an effort to encourage people 
to check their details on the register include: 
• Interviews on LMFM /IRadio/ Midlands Radio Public relation campaigns – targeting older and 
 
younger electors 
• Presentation to Comhairle na nÓg 
• Pop up information desks at libraries across the county 
o 
Presentation to Older Persons Council, Information packs circulated to Active Retirement/Lively 
Citizen groups 
• Advertisements in Meath Chronicle 
• Presentation and Register to Vote event in Laytown School 
• Migrant information cultural event – staff available for queries, etc 
• Presentation given to Public Participation Network (PPN) 
• Regular updates on MCC social media regarding registering to vote, updating your details, etc 
Meath County Council will continue with it’s local targeted campaign to update the electoral 
register, with the aim of improving its accuracy and completeness, while also encouraging greater 
voter engagement and participation. 
 
Councillor Maria White introduced the motion.  She noted that further engagement on social media 
platforms such as Instagram would be required to meet younger voters.  Councillor Helen Meyer 
supported the motion. 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Maria White and seconded by Councillor Peter Caffrey. 
 
9.8 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
“I call on Meath County Council to write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to request an increase in the income threshold for the Mortgage to Rent Scheme, adopted 
by Meath County Council in 2021.” 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
The Mortgage to Rent scheme is a government initiative to help homeowners who are at risk of 
losing their home through mortgage arrears. 
Meath County Council administer the Mortgage to Rent Scheme (MTR) as per the guidelines issued 
by the Department for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. As well as meeting the qualifying 
criteria for the scheme applicants must also be eligible for Social Housing Support in the local 
authority in whose area the house is located. 
The social housing eligibility bands were introduced in 2021 and in recognition of the increased cost 
of accommodation these bands have been increased by €5,000 in all housing authorities from 1st 
January 2023. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
Meath County Council understands that the income eligibility limits are due for revision. If the 
Motion is agreed by Members, the Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage seeking an increase to these limits. 
Councillor Fionnán Blake introduced the motion.  He acknowledged the benefits of the Mortgage to Rent 
Scheme and noted that the income thresholds were too low. 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Fionnán Blake and seconded by Councillor Eddie Fennessy. 
 
 
9.9 
Submitted by Councillor Peter Caffrey 
 
“Given recent figures which show no IDA visits to North Meath and a poor overall ranking for 
Meath, I call on Meath County Council to address this by prioritising investment in infrastructure 
and skills to sustain future employment from both local and multinational companies.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
In 2024 the IDA hosted just one site visit by FDI investors to County Meath, while there were 466 
nationwide. Meath County Council has addressed this issue with the agency and has commenced 
a series of regular engagements with both the IDA and Enterprise Ireland to ensure that Meath is 
considered when recommending potential locations to such investors. 
 
The Economic Development section is also proactively trying to address the issue and has 
produced a Strategic Employment Sites brochure in-house, highlighting to potential 
developers large areas of appropriately zoned land across the county. 
 
In addition to this, the team are working on the following: 
• 
FDI document – the preparation of a FDI Marketing Brochure that highlights the reasons why 
businesses will succeed if they locate in Meath. The document focuses on the following assets 
o 
World-Class Workforce 
o 
Infrastructure and Connectivity 
o 
Pro-Business Eco-System 
o 
Quality of Life 
This document will be ready to launch in the coming weeks. 
• 
Engaging with the Regional Skills Forum Manager for the Mid East to progress a number of 
training opportunities for businesses located or operating in Meath. 
• 
Developing links with LMETB, the AMTCE in Dundalk, Dunboyne College, DKIT and Maynooth 
University. 
• 
Working with local businesses to identify skills gaps and any other issues that are hampering 
their ability to scale and grow. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
The Thrive Centre of Business Excellence will launch at the end of September and represents a 
significant investment by Meath County Council in supporting businesses, both indigenous and 
FDIs, with excellent facilities for hosting training and networking opportunities, as well as housing 
all of the business support teams in one place. 
Councillor Peter Caffrey introduced the motion.  He acknowledged the response to the motion and noted 
the importance of FDI investment to the County. 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Peter Caffrey and seconded by Councillor Fionnán Blake. 
 
9.10 Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"To ask the Housing Department to implement a specific protocol when contacting individuals on 
the housing list to verify their ongoing need for housing. This protocol should include sending an 
email first, followed by a letter, and then making a phone call, in that order. The current practice 
of sending a letter and making a phone call is inadequate, as neither method is traceable, leading 
to unnecessary disputes. It is crucial that every effort is made to reach an individual before they 
are removed from the housing list." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
Under Section 21 of the 2009 Act, the Minister may direct each local authority to prepare a 
summary (in the form prescribed by the Minister), of the social housing assessments carried out in 
its administrative area. The purpose of the SSHA is to capture the total number of households 
qualified for social housing support across the country whose social housing need is not being 
met, in order to understand the level of need for such support. Where a household is eligible and 
demonstrates a need (as per the Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 (SI 84, as amended), 
they are then deemed to qualify for support. They are entered on the record of qualified 
households for social housing support (or the waiting list). The SSHA is an important exercise that 
can tell us more about the profile of applicants for social housing support. This can inform policy 
and allow the Council to plan for the right types of housing support. 
 
The Housing Department has a protocol in place to complete an annual Social Housing 
Assessment which aligns with Departmental guidelines and which includes the issuing of an 
original letter, first reminder letter, second reminder letter and phone call attempts, all the 
aforementioned attempted contacts and dates are noted and logged by the Housing 
Department.   
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion.  She noted the use of emails in tracking 
communications.  Councillors Alan Lawes and Eddie Fennessy supported the motion. 
 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Alan Lawes. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
9.11 Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"That the Council include a searchable database in the monthly executive report that contains all 
motions and questions submitted by Members to date. This database should include the 
following details: the question submitted and the corresponding answer, the date the motion 
was submitted, the current status of the motion, and the date the motion was closed." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
The Meath County Council Standing Orders regulating the proceedings of the Council require the 
Meetings Administrator to maintain a register of questions and written answers and this register 
be available to the Councillors at any time. A register of questions and motions is maintained 
and available for inspection. Updates on motions are provided to the Elected Members on a 
quarterly basis. 
 
Councillor Helen Meyer introduced the motion, noting the requirement for follow-up of motions 
passed.  Councillors Maria White and Alan Tobin supported the motion. 
 
 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor 
Helen Meyer and seconded by Councillor Maria White. 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
"To write to the Office of An Taoiseach, to ask that the Irish Government plan and prepare for 
Irish unity through the following actions: 
 
 
Establish an all-island Citizens’ Assembly and a Joint Oireachtas Committee 
on Irish Unity 
Produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic society and 
key stakeholders, including local government 
Work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the Good Friday 
Agreement.” 
 
Councillor Eddie Fennessy introduced the motion calling on the Government of Ireland to take the 
lead for Irish Unity.  There were interventions from Councillors Fionnán Blake, Brian Fitzgerald, Dave 
Boyne, Maria White, Gerry O’Connor, Noel French, Alan Lawes, David Gilroy, Joe Fox and Eddie 
Fennessy.  The members noted the existing structures in place in the Good Friday Agreement and 
the work being undertaken as part of Shared Island Initiatives. 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor proposed an amendment, which was seconded by Councillor Alan Tobin as 
follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
To write to the Office of An Taoiseach, to ask that the Irish Government plan and prepare for Irish 
unity. 
 
The amended motion, proposed by Councillor Eddie Fennessy and seconded by Councillor Fionnán Blake, 
was agreed by a show of hands vote with 19 members in agreement, 7 members not in agreement and no 
abstentions. 
 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0   
Any Other Business 
 
Councillor Alan Lawes expressed his disappointment that a notice of motion had not been included on the Agenda 
of the Council Meeting, and he noted that he had submitted correspondence to the Chief Executive, An 
Cathaoirleach and The Meetings Administrator in respect of same.  There were interventions from Councillors 
Gerry O’Connor and David Gilroy. 
 
Councillor Peter Caffrey queried figures relating to Members' Expenses, which had been published recently. 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor responded. 
 
The meeting concluded at 16.25. 
