Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
Ordinary Meeting 
6th October 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, Sean Drew, John Duffy, 
Yvonne Everard, Brian Fitzgerald, Joe Fox, Noel French, David Gilroy, Geraldine Keogan, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, 
Carol Lennon, Paddy Meade, Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly, Alan 
Tobin, Dave Boyne, Padraig Fitzsimons, Michael Gallagher, Ronan Moore, Emer Tóibín, 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillor Stephen McKee, Conor Tormey, Yemi Adenuga, Mike Bray, Eddie Fennessy, Suzanne Jamal, Sharon 
Tolan, Maria White, 
Apologies:   
Councillors Joe Bonner, Helen Meyer, Amanda Smith, 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Fiona Fallon, Bary Lynch, Gareth McMahon, 
Senior Engineer: Nicholas Whyatt 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
Apologies:  
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on September 1, 2025 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on September 1, 2025, were confirmed on the proposal of Councillor 
Francis Deane and seconded by Councillor Alan Tobin. 
1.2 
 Confirmation of minutes of Special meeting held on September 9, 2025 
The minutes of the Special meeting held on September 9, 2025, were confirmed on the proposal of Councillor 
David Gilroy and seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy. 

Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
        1.3 
Confirmation of minutes of presidential nomination meeting held on September 22, 2025 
The minutes of the presidential nomination meeting held on September 22, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal 
of Councillor Nick Killian and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were interventions from Councillors Emer Tóibín, Dave Boyne, Nick Killian and Michael Gallagher regarding 
the process of the presidential meeting and the difficulties associated with Zoom in relation to such meetings.  It 
was noted that the meeting was conducted in accordance with the Standing Orders. 
3.0 Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations 
3.1 
Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
Noleen McKeever, Planning on the death of her father, Joseph (Joe) Connell. 
Andy Tobin (Transport Kells MD) and Claire Soady (Age Friendly Shared Service) on the death of 
their mother, Claire Tobin. 
Alan Kennedy, Housing on the death of his father, Eamonn (Yama) Kennedy. 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 
183 of the Local Government Act, 2001 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.0014Ha of land by way of transfer of freehold interest at 
Donaghmore, Navan, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 14th August 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 14th August, 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Francis Deane and seconded by 
Councillor John Duffy. 
4.2 
To consider the disposal of 0.0289Ha of land by way of Deed of Rectification of Boundaries at 
Tower Court and Poynton Place, Ballivor, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 21st August 
2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 21st August, 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Joe Fox and seconded by 
Councillor Padraig Coffey. 
4.3 
To consider the disposal of 0.0195Ha of land by way of transfer of freehold interest at Cavan Street, 
Oldcastle, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 1st September 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 1st September, 2025 under Section 183 of 
the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Peter Caffrey and seconded 
by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
4.4 
To consider the disposal of 0.4560 Ha of land by way of transfer of freehold interest at 
Galmoystown, Dromone, Oldcastle, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 27th 
August 2025. 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 27th August, 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Sean Drew and seconded by 
Councillor Peter Caffrey. 
 
4.5 
To consider the disposal of 0.4348 Ha of land by way of transfer of freehold interest at Flowerhill, 
Navan, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 3rd September 2025. 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 3rd September, 2025 under Section 183 of 
the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Francis Deane and seconded 
by Councillor John Duffy. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 
Update on Local Government Task Force 
 
Cllr Joe Fox updated the Members on the Local Government Task Force and provided details on the sub-
committee pillars.  It was noted that Councillor Joe Fox is a member of the funding pillar and Councillor 
Amanda Smith is a member of the Governance and Accountability Pillar.  There were interventions from 
Councillors Nick Killian, Mike Bray and Alan Tobin.  The importance of engagement with the process was 
noted. 
 
5.1.2 
Appointment of additional Councillor to the Regional Health Forum - Dublin North East 
(Deferred from September 2025) 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Brian Fitzgerald, seconded by Councillor Carol Lennon and unanimously 
agreed, Councillor Nick Killian was appointed to the Regional Health Forum. 
 
5.1.3 
To agree to hold the Statutory Budget Meeting on Monday 24th November 2025 @ 1.30pm 
in hybrid format. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Padraig Fitzsimons, it was 
unanimously agreed to hold the meeting in hybrid format. 
 
5.2 
Community 
 
5.2.1 
To approve the allocation under the Knockharley Environmental Community Projects 
Scheme, as recommended by the Knockharley Community Liaison Committee and 
endorsed by the Ashbourne Municipal District Councillors on 2nd September 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
The allocation under the Knockharley Environmental Community Projects Scheme endorsed by the 
Ashbourne Municipal District Councillors on 2nd September 2025 , was approved on the proposal of 
Councillor Alan Tobin and seconded by Councillor Gerry O`Connor. 
 
5.3 
Economic Development 
 
5.3.1 
To receive a presentation on Boyne Valley Cluster Orientation Infrastructure Projects 
(Failte Ireland) 
 
Mr. Anthony McGuigan, Director, of The Paul Hogarth Company presented on Boyne Valley Cluster 
Orientation Infrastructure Projects (Failte Ireland).  He noted the conceptual and design development 
including the reminagined Boyne Valley Drive.   
 
There were interventions from Councillors Ronan Moore; Joe Fox; Alan Tobin; Sean Drew; Sarah Reilly; 
Dave Boyne; David Gillroy; Padraig Coffey; Nick Killian; Eugene Cassidy; Emer Tóibín; Maria Murphy; 
Paddy Meade; Gerry O`Connor; Peter Caffrey; Michael Gallagher and An Cathaoirleach.  The Elected 
Members welcomed the presentation and inquired about matters relating to uniformity of signage, 
promotion, funding, timelines for delivery, and collaboration with other local authorities.  Responses to 
queries raised were provided by Mr. McGuigan and Mr. Dara McGowan. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councilors Nick Killian, Fionan Blake, Gerry O` Connor, Mike Bray, Alan 
Tobin, Paddy Meade, Joe Fox, Brian Fitzgerald, Michael Gallagher, Sean Drew and Peter Caffrey.  
Matters raised included: 
 
Planning: 
 
Commencement notices; Enforcement; Council Chamber; revised housing targets;  
 
Transport: 
 Pedestrian access to Applegreen Service Station, Dunshaughlin; footpath 
rehabilitation programme; Safe Routes to School Scheme; public bike scheme 
 
Housing: 
 
Age profile of those seeking emergency accommodation; welfare checks;  
 
Environment:  
Community Climate Action Fund;  
 
Emergency Services: Severe weather response. 
 
Corporate Services: 
Delivery of new Council Chamber 
 
Responses to queries raised were provided by the Chief Executive, Directors of Service, Fiona Fallon, Barry 
Lynch, Dara McGowan, Nicholas Whyatt and Gareth McMahon.  It was agreed that a workshop would be 
arranged with the Elected Members to provide an update on proposals for the new Council Chamber. 
 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
The Meetings Administrator noted that the CPG met on Monday September 29 to consider the draft 
agenda and arrangements for the October Council Meeting.   
 
She further outlined the reports from the Transportation & Urban Regeneration SPC of 11th September 
2025, the Economic Development, Enterprise, Tourism, EU Affairs and Rural Regeneration SPC of 11th 
September and the Community and Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs SPC of 17th September 
were noted and uploaded to the Resources Section of Decision Time. 
 
Finally, it was noted that the Conference and Training Schedules were approved and circulated. 
 
7.0        Correspondence 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
   8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
 
"Can the Council confirm whether the gritting routes for the winter maintenance programme in 
Meath align with Fingal County Council’s winter maintenance programme, specifically Fingal’s 
primary and secondary routes?" 
 
Response 
All National and Regional roads that cross the Meath/Fingal border are salted on both sides of the 
border.  
Any of Fingal’s Priority 1 routes that go to the Meath/Fingal border are also salted on the Meath 
side. Most of Fingal's Priority 2 routes that go to the Meath/Fingal border are also salted on the 
Meath side, with the exception of the following local roads in Co. Meath: 
 
• 
Garristown to Ardcath (L1011-24 and L1011-15), 2.25km 
• 
Garristown to N2 (L5007-23), 1.57km 
• 
The Ward to Kilbride (L1007-40), 1.84km 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Noel French 
 
"That Meath County Council consider expanding the road sweeper programme to include flexible 
dates for towns to accommodate one off events such as festivals and to include housing estates. 
This initiative would greatly enhance the excellent work being undertaken locally by Tidy Town 
Groups and Residents’ Associations across the County." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
The deployment of the road sweeper is an operational issue for the MD Engineer. Where feasible, 
and not conflicting with programmed work, efforts to accommodate one off events will be made 
once timely notice of the event is given to the MD Engineer. There are a significant number of 
housing estates in charge across all 6 MDs, introducing housing estates to the programme would 
negatively impact the extensive and regular programme of sweeping across urban areas and public 
spaces. The volunteerism by local community groups is acknowledged and MD Engineers will 
continue to work with these groups and assist with particular issues where feasible.   
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Noel French and seconded by Councillor Nick Killian.  Councillor 
French introduced the motion outlining the benefits of the additional road sweeping  services.  There 
were interventions from Councillors Ronan Moore and Alan Tobin, who noted the implications on the 
budget as well as the impact on existing services.  It was unanimously agreed that the matter would be 
considered as part of the Budget discussions.   
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Paddy Meade 
 
“That Meath County Council immediately pause and suspend all actions to advance the proposed 
forestry schemes at Polecastle, Lobinstown and Footstown Great, pending full consultation with 
local elected members, the residents of Lobinstown parish, and a detailed assessment of the 
community, housing and agricultural needs of the area.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
Meath County Council has agreed to work with the Forestry Division to undertake initial 
assessments of the Polecastle, Lobinstown and Footstown Great sites to determine whether 
woodland creation may be feasible. Options under consideration may include native woodland, 
NeighbourWoods for public recreation, or agroforestry (integrating trees within farmland to 
combine food, timber, carbon, and demonstration-site benefits). 
At this early stage, the Council wishes to emphasise that no firm commitments have been made to 
establish forestry at Polecastle, Lobinstown, Footstown Great, or any other sites in the county. 
However, we will continue to engage with DAFM officials to assess the suitability of local authority–
owned lands for woodland creation and/or agroforestry demonstration. 
Elected Members and residents will be engaged comprehensively as part of any future suitability 
assessments under the national Forestry Programme 2023–2027. Any evaluation will incorporate 
community, housing, and agricultural considerations. 
 
Councillor Paddy Meade introduced the motion, noting the impact of the proposals on the local 
community.  The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal 
of Councillor Paddy Meade and seconded by Councillor Michael Gallagher. 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Alan Tobin 
“I call on the Minister of Health to develop a strategy and legislation that will bring in strict controls 
around the use of nitrous oxide (laughing gas) which will also include measures to enable An Garda 
Siochana to test drivers involved in road traffic collisions for the presence of nitrous oxide in their 
blood.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Councillor Alan Tobin introduced the motion, noting the requirement for roadside spot checks on the use of 
nitrous oxide.  The motion, proposed by Councillor Alan Tobin and seconded by Councillor Gerry O`Connor was 
unanimously agreed. 
 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0  Any Other Business 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian; Carol Lennon; Peter Caffrey; Maria Murphy and Padraig 
Coffey.  Matters raised included the difficulties in Laytown/Bettystown MD in accessing recycling centres for the 
bulky waste drop off events, Oldcastle Public Realm project, accessing council services during storm events.  
Tributes were paid to former Ratoath Area Engineer Phillip Traynor and best wishes were extended on his new role 
in the Council.  Tributes were also paid to Shane Lowry on his recent success at the Ryder Cup. 
 
The meeting concluded at 16.20pm 
