 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Special Meeting 
10thNovember 2025 @ 2.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Joe Bonner, Peter Caffrey, Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Brian Fitzgerald, 
Joe Fox, Michael Gallagher, David Gilroy, Geraldine Keogan, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Paddy Meade, 
Ronan Moore, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Paul O’Rourke, Amanda Smith and Marie White 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillor Yemi Adenuga, Dave Boyne, Eugene Cassidy, Sean Drew, Eddie Fennessy, Padraig Fitzsimons, Noel French, 
Suzanne Jamal, Stephen McKee, Helen Meyer, Maria Murphy, Alan Tobin, Emer Tóibín, Sharon Tolan and Conor 
Tormey 
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Mike Bray and Sarah Reilly. 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Fiona Fallon, Barry Lynch, Gareth McMahon,  
Senior Planner: Alan Russell 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
Apologies:   
 
1.0 
To consider a motion from the Elected Members pursuant to Section 13(1A) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
 
“The Elected Members of Meath County Council resolve, pursuant to section 13(1A) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended), to request the Chief Executive to prepare a report on a proposal by them to  
vary the County Development Plan 2021-2027 in the following term, namely; 
 
i)                    To zone any and all lands, previously zoned for residential and related development in the Meath 
County Development Plan 2013-2019 (as extended by Law), for residential and related development (to 
include mixed use development of housing and other such development) in the Meath County 
Development Plan 2021-2027. 
ii)                   To remove any restriction on development of lands zoned for residential and related development 
(to include mixed use development of housing and other such development) restricting the development of 
such lands to after 2027. 
iii)                 For the avoidance of doubt, this motion relates only to those lands previously dezoned and/or 
restricted to development after 2027. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí / Meeting Minutes 
 
Reason: The lands referred to in this motion were rezoned solely or primarily to comply with the Core Strategy based 
figures contained within the National Planning Framework. The population figures have subsequently been 
determined to be an underestimate of the population at the time, now and in the future.  Minister for Housing has 
subsequently directed local authorities to vary their County Development Plan to provide for additional lands 
capable of accommodating housing and related development. This motion is in accordance with the same.” 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Brian Fitzgerald and seconded by Councillor Gerry O’Connor. 
Councillor Brian Fitzgerald introduced the motion.  He noted the difficulties with the census figures used for the 
development of the core strategy in the current County Development Plan.  He also noted the difficulties 
associated with young couples trying to get onto the property ladder.  He asserted that the motion did not include 
any lands impacted by flooding. 
 
There were interventions of support from Councillors Gerry O’Connor, Nick Killian and David Gilroy.  The urgent 
demand for housing was noted.  It was further noted that the signatories of the letter requesting the special 
meeting would seek a meeting with Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, James Browne TD, and 
Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, John Cummins TD. 
 
Councillors Ronan Moore, Paddy Meade, Maria White, Yvonne Everard, Sharon Tolan and Alan Tobin did not 
support the motion.  The difficulties associated with the current housing crisis were noted, however, there were 
concerns with the potential unintentional risks associated with the broad nature of the motion, including the 
potential to zone lands affected by flooding. 
 
Councillor Sean Drew welcomed the commitment from the Chief Executive that the premise of the motion will 
form part of the discussions at the forthcoming Planning Consultation Workshop, and he proposed that the motion 
be withdrawn.  Councillor Joe Fox seconded the proposal to withdraw the motion.  Councillor Brian Fitzgerald 
acknowledged the contributions from all Councillors and agreed to withdraw the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive thanked the Elected Members for their contributions and provided further clarity on the 
Section 28 Guidelines.  He also outlined details of the dual process ongoing in relation to the variation of the 
County Development Plan 2021 – 2027 and the review of the County Development Plan 2021 – 2027. 
 
The motion was withdrawn on the proposal of Councillor Sean Drew, seconded by Councillor Joe Fox and with the 
unanimous agreement of the Elected Members. 
 
The meeting concluded at 3.40pm. 
