 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
3rd November 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Yemi Adenuga, Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Mike Bray, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, 
Francis Deane, Sean Drew, John Duffy, Yvonne Everard, Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel French, 
David Gilroy, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Carol Lennon, Helen Meyer, Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, 
Paul O’Rourke, Sarah Reilly, Amanda Smith, Emer Tóibín, Sharon Tolan and Maria White. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillor Eddie Fennessy, Michael Gallagher, Suzanne Jamal, Geraldine Keogan, Paddy Meade, Ronan Moore, Alan 
Tobin and Conor Tormey. 
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Dave Boyne, Stephen McKee 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Fiona Fallon, Bary Lynch, Gareth McMahon,  
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
Apologies:   
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1       Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on October 6, 2025 
 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor asked that the minutes of the meeting be updated to reflect the agreement of the 
executive to hold a workshop on the new Council Chamber.  This was agreed by the Meetings Administrator. 
 
The minutes of the Ordinary meeting held on October 6, 2025, were confirmed, subject to the amendment above, 
on the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by Councillor Francis Deane. 
 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were none. 
 

Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
Cllr Brian Fitzgerald expressed his dissatisfaction that the Notice of Motion submitted by the Independent Group and 
Councillor Gerry O’Connor was not included on the agenda for the November Full Council meeting. He noted that he 
was submitting correspondence seeking a special meeting of the Council, and he left the meeting. 
The Chief Executive noted that he had previously discussed the matter with Cllr. Fitzgerald and that the wording of 
the motion was not in accordance with the legislation.  He further stated that he had taken on board the requests of 
the members and that the variation would be discussed at the forthcoming workshop on the variation of the County 
Development Plan, due to be held on 1st December 2025. 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
3.1 Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
The family and friends of Sr. Stanislaus Kennedy (Treasa), Religious Sisters of Charity. 
3.2 Expressions of Congratulations were extended to: 
Summerhill GAA team winning the Meath Senior Football Championship. 
The Ratoath team for winning the 2025 Meath Senior Hurling Championship. 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 183 
of the Local Government Act, 2001 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.013Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold interest at Macetown, 
Navan, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 1st October 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 1st October 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Francis Deane and seconded by 
Councillor John Duffy. 
4.2 
To consider the disposal of 0.0584Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold interest at Garadice, 
Kilcock, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 22nd September 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 22nd September 2025 under Section 183 of 
the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Joe Fox and seconded by 
Councillor Padraig Coffey. 
4.3 
To consider the disposal of 0.0024Ha of property by way of transfer of a freehold interest at St 
Anthony's Villas, Laytown, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 8th October 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 8th October 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Sharon Tolan and seconded by 
Councillor Maria White. 
4.4 
To consider the disposal of 2.8417Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold interest at Liscarton, 
Navan, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 20th October 2025. 

Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
Councillor Yvonne Everard noted the sizable amount of land that was being disposed of and called for the 
matter to be deferred.  Councillor Nick Killian noted that the matter had been discussed and agreed at the 
recent Navan MD meeting. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 20th October 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was proposed by Councillor Francis Deane and seconded by Councillor John 
Duffy and agreed by a show of hands vote with 21 in agreement, 6 not in agreement and 1 abstention. 
4.5 
To consider the disposal of 0.0321Ha of land by freehold interest at Hill View, Proudstown, 
Navan, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 11th September 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 11th September 2025 under Section 183 of 
the Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Francis Deane and seconded 
by Councillor John Duffy. 
4.6 
To consider the disposal of 0.0203Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold interest at 
Harlinstown, Slane, Co Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 21st August 2025. 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 21st August 2025 under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Wayne Harding and seconded by 
Councillor Sharon Tolan. 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
5.1 
Corporate Affairs and Governance 
5.1.1 
To receive a verbal update on Local Government Task Force. 
Councillor Joe Fox provided an overview of the Taskforce in Local Government.  He outlined details 
of the various pillars being considered and the extended timeframes agreed.  He further noted that 
Councillors could provide input into the process through the AILG and LAMA. 
5.2 
Planning 
5.2.1 
To consider Meath County Council Draft Biodiversity Plan 2025 – 2030. 
Mr. Ben Malone, Biodiversity Officer, delivered a presentation on the draft Meath Biodiversity Action Plan 
2025-2030.  He noted that the Plan reflects the Council’s continued commitment to protecting nature and 
building a climate-resilient, sustainable future.  There were interventions of support from Councillors Noel 
French, Ronan Moore, David Gillroy, and Gerry O`Connor. 
The Meath County Council Draft Biodiversity Plan 2025 – 2030 was approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Gerry O`Connor and seconded by Councillor David Gilroy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
5.2.2 
To receive an update on the proposed variations of Meath County Development Plan 2021–2027 
 
Mr. Alan Russell, Senior Planner, delivered a presentation on the proposed variations of Meath County 
Development Plan 2021 – 2027.  He also provided details of the recently published Section 28 Guidelines, 
including the National Planning Framework revised housing targets.  He outlined the implications of the 
revised guidelines for County Meath including the requirement for Planning Authorities to commence a 
variation of the existing plan, integrating the revised housing target figures into the Core Strategy as quickly 
as possible.  It was further noted that any variation to a development plan will need to be assessed for 
Strategic Environmental Assessment, Birds, Habitats and Flooding Directives  
 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Noel French, Nick Killian, Maria Murphy, Sarah 
Reilly, Sean Drew, Sharon Tolan, Gerry O`Connor, Ronan Moore, Eugene Cassidy, Joe Fox, David Gilroy, 
Yemi Adenuga, Padraig Coffey, Maria White, Alan Tobin and Peter Caffrey.  Matters raised included the 
availability of critical infrastructure, impacts of judicial reviews, the role of the Planning Regulator, 
requirements of the settlement capacity audit, notices to landowners, zoning of post-2027 lands, the 
provision of amenities alongside housing.  Responses to queries were provided by the Chief Executive, 
Director of Services for Planning, Mr. Gareth McMahon and the Senior Planner, Mr. Alan Russell. 
 
5.3 
Transportation 
 
5.3.1 
To consider Meath County Council Traffic Calming Policy. 
 
Paul McNulty, Senior Executive Engineer, provided an overview of the draft Meath County Council Traffic 
Calming Policy.  It was noted that traffic calming refers to physical measures designed to reduce the 
adverse effects that speed and volume of traffic have on our roads and it provides a framework for the 
delivery of road safety measures throughout the County. 
 
The draft policy was broadly welcomed by the Elected Members.  There were interventions and queries 
from Councillors Mike Bray, Noel French, Eddie Fennessy, Ronan Moore, Joe Bonner, Maria White, David 
Gilroy, Sharon Tolan, Emer Tóibín, Alan Tobin, Padraig Coffey and Gerry O`Connor.  Matters raised include 
the number of identified sites throughout the County, financial provisions, input from elected members, 
the maintenance of existing traffic safety infrastructure and the process for consideration of data collected. 
 
Responses to queries were provided by the Director of Services, Mr. Martin Murray and the Senior 
Executive Engineer, Mr. Paul McNulty. 
 
The Meath County Council Traffic Calming Policy was unanimously approved on the proposal of Councillor 
Mike Bray and seconded by Councillor Padraig Fitzsimons. 
 
5.4 
Community 
 
5.4.1 
To approve the allocation under the Knockharley Environmental Community Projects 
Scheme 2025, as recommended by the Knockharley Community Liaison Committee. 
 
The allocation under the Knockharley Environmental Community Projects Scheme 2025, was approved on 
the proposal of Councillor Joe Bonner and seconded by Councillor Amanda Smith. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
 
5.4.2 
To approve the nomination of Aisling Monaghan from Meath Film Collective to fill the 
vacancy arising from the resignation of Siún O’Connor on the Community, Cultural 
Development and Gaeltacht Affairs Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
The nomination of Aisling Monaghan from Meath Film Collective to fill the vacancy arising from the 
resignation of Siún O’Connor on the Community, Cultural Development and Gaeltacht Affairs Strategic 
Policy Committee was approved on the proposal of Councillor Sharon Tolan and seconded by Councillor 
Alan Lawes. 
 
5.5 
Housing 
 
5.5.1 
To consider draft Meath County Council Policy on Standards in Emergency 
Accommodation. 
 
Fiona Fallon, Director of Services, provided an overview on Policy on Standards in Emergency 
Accommodation.  It was noted that the policy is concerned with the physical standards that apply to buildings 
used to provide emergency accommodation supplied on a regular basis by the private sector, to people 
experiencing homelessness.  There were interventions and queries from Councillors Alan Lawes, Helen 
Meyer, Alan Tobin and Emer Tóibín.  Matters raised included the number of service users, numbers of site 
visits and inspections, the use of emergency accommodation by other local authorities and the provision of 
laundry and cooking facilities.  Responses to queries raised were provided by the Director of Services, Ms. 
Fiona Fallon. 
 
The Meath County Council Policy on Standards in Emergency Accommodation Committee was unanimously 
approved on the proposal of Councillor Alan Lawes and seconded by Councillor Maria Murphy. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Alan Lawes, Noel French, Helen Meyer, Maria Murphy, Sharon 
Tolan, Padraig Fitzsimons, Eddie Fennessy, Yemi Adenuga and Maria White.  
 
Matters raised include: 
 
Transport:  
Opening LDR4, LIS Schemes, CIS Schemes, SRTS Schemes  
 
Housing:  
Increase in homeless figures, numbers of HAP applications processed, Tenant Increment 
Scheme 
 
Tourism: 
Púca Festival  
 
Environment: Return Scheme, Bin Surround Initiative 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
Emergency Services:  Emergency Response to Storm Amy 
 
Community:  
Comhairle na nÓg, PPN Conference 
 
Responses to queries raised were provided by Ms. Fiona Fallon, Mr. Barry Lynch and Mr. Martin Murray. 
 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator provided an update on the recent CPG meeting held on Tuesday, October 28. 
During the meeting, members discussed the draft agenda and outlined the arrangements for the 
upcoming November Council Meeting. 
 
The CPG also received an update on the preparations for Budget 2026 and a review of the NOAC 
Performance Indicator Report for 2024. They also considered the Draft Biodiversity Plan, the draft Traffic 
Calming Policy, and the Council's Policy Statement on Emergency Accommodation. 
 
Additionally, the report from the Housing and Integration SPC dated October 2, 2025, was noted.  The 
Conference and Training Schedules were also approved. 
 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Sean Drew 
 
“Please provide an update on the status of Meath County Council's request to The Housing 
Agency in July 2024, for the inclusion of Meath into the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant 
Scheme and clarify if the request by Meath County Council to The Housing Agency, was to 
designate all administrative areas of Co. Meath as eligible for the Scheme.” 
 
Response 
 
Meath County Council has corresponded with the Department of Housing, Local Government 
& Heritage in relation to two particular cases in County Meath. The Housing Agency on behalf 
of the Department has conducted a detailed technical report on these properties and has 
recently presented same to the officials responsible in the Department for consideration and 
recommendation to the Minister, and we await the outcome of same. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
  
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Fionnan Blake 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
“To call on Meath County Council to undertake and develop a clear management plan to 
address overgrown trees in Housing Estates, which should involve direct communications 
with Residents Committees." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
A register of complaints or queries received in relation to trees is held in each Municipal 
District. Many of these relate to trees in housing estates that have been taken in charge. An 
Arborist is procured from time to time to assess the trees on the register and to recommend 
maintenance works or felling where necessary. 
 
A tender is then issued to procure tree surgeons to carry out works as recommended, subject 
to available funding. 
 
In some instances, minor maintenance works are undertaken by Meath County Council 
crews. 
 
Councillor Fionnan Blake introduced the motion.  He outlined the impacts of overgrown trees on 
footpaths, boundary walls and telecommunications infrastructure.  There were interventions of support 
from Councillors Maria White and Padraig Fitzsimons. 
 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Fionnan Blake and seconded by Councillor Maria White. 
 
 
10.0 
General Interest Motions 
 
10.1 
Submitted by Councillor Paddy Meade 
 
“That Meath County Council states its support for the immediate inclusion of Commercial Bus 
Operators in the Child Leap Card Scheme, which provides free bus travel for children under 
nine, and writes to the Minister for Transport and the National Transport Authority to request 
that this be implemented." 
 
The Meetings Administrator advised that Councillor Paddy Meade had withdrawn the motion. 
 
10.2 
Submitted by Councillor Sarah Reilly 
 
“That Meath County Council write to the Minister for Health and the HSE calling for the 
reinstatement of funding for continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems for all people 
with cystic fibrosis-related diabetes, recognising their vital role in managing health, 
preventing complications, and improving quality of life.” 
 
Councillor Sarah Reilly introduced the motion.  She noted the withdrawal of funding was placing a 
financial burden on patients and families. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
The motion was unanimously agreed on the proposal of Councillor Sarah Reilly and seconded by 
Councillor Yemi Adenuga. 
 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
11.1 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community & Enterprise 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0   Any Other Business 
There was none. 
 
The meeting concluded at 5.10pm 
