 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
 
Ordinary Meeting 
1st December 2025 @ 1.30p.m. 
Buvinda House, Navan (and online via zoom) 
 
Presiding: 
An Cathaoirleach, Councillor Wayne Harding 
Councillors Present: 
Councillors Fionnán Blake, Joe Bonner, Peter Caffrey, Eugene Cassidy, Padraig Coffey, Francis Deane, John Duffy, 
Yvonne Everard, Eddie Fennessy, Brian Fitzgerald, Padraig Fitzsimons, Joe Fox, Noel French, Michael Gallagher, David 
Gilroy, Nick Killian, Alan Lawes, Stephen McKee, Maria Murphy, Gerry O’Connor, Caroline O’Reilly, Sarah Reilly, 
Amanda Smith, Alan Tobin, Emer Tóibín and Maria White. 
 
Councillors Present via Zoom:   
Councillor Yemi Adenuga, Dave Boyne, Sean Drew, Suzanne Jamal, Geraldine Keogan, Carol Lennon, Paddy Meade, 
Ronan Moore, Sharon Tolan and Conor Tormey. 
 
Apologies:   
Councillors Mike Bray, Helen Meyer, Paul O’Rourke 
 
Officials in attendance: 
Chief Executive: Kieran Kehoe 
Directors of Service: Des Foley, Fiona Lawless, Dara McGowan, Fiona Fallon, Bary Lynch, Gareth McMahon 
Meetings Administrator: Elaine Daly 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes 
 
1.1 
Confirmation of minutes of Ordinary meeting held on November 3, 2025 
The minutes of the ordinary meeting held on November 3, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of Councillor Joe 
Fox and seconded by Councillor Sarah Reilly. 
 
1.2 
Confirmation of minutes of Special meeting held on November 10, 2025 
The minutes of the Special meeting held on November 10, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of Councillor Nick 
Killian and seconded by Councillor Alan Lawes. 
 
 
1.3 
Confirmation of minutes of Statutory Budget meeting held on November 24, 2025 
The minutes of the Statutory Budget meeting held on November 24, 2025 were confirmed on the proposal of 
Councillor Gerry O`Connor and seconded by Councillor Noel French. 
 
 
2.0 
Matters arising from the Minutes 
There were none. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
3.0 
Expressions of Sympathy and Congratulations  
3.1 Expressions of sympathy were extended to: 
 
The family of the late Raymond (Ray) Collier, former employee. 
 
The family of the late James (Jimmy) O’Reilly, former employee. 
 
Adrian Santry, Transportation and Diane Santry, Finance on the death of their brother/brother-    in-law, Diarmuid 
(Dee) Santry. 
 
The family of the late Peter (Pete) Price, former employee. 
 
Francis Duffy, Water Services on the death of his mother, Philomena Duffy. 
 
The families the late of: Dylan Commins, Shay Duffy, Chloe Hipson, Alan McCluskey and Chloe McGee 
who died tragically in an accident in Co. Louth 
 
The families of the late: Paul Conway and Wesley O’Reilly who died tragically in an accident in Gormanston, Co. 
Meath 
 
The family of the late Michael Herron who died in a workplace accident (Tayto Snacks) 
 
The family of the late Aoife Bird (nee Oates) and her daughter Ailbhe, and her colleagues at Ashbourne Community 
School. 
 
3.2 Expressions of Congratulations were extended to: 
 
Cllr Yemi Adenuga on winning the Irish Tatler Woman of the Year in the category “Public Life”. 
 
4.0 
Disposal of Land in accordance with Statutory Notices circulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 183 
of the Local Government Act, 2001 
 
4.1 
To consider the disposal of 0.0207 Ha of land by way of transfer of a freehold interest at Sli Ultain, 
Layton, Co. Meath, in accordance with Statutory Notice dated 22nd October 2025. 
 
The disposal, in accordance with the statutory notice issued on 22nd October, 2025 under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, was approved on the proposal of Councillor Sharon Tolan and seconded by Councillor Alan 
Tobin. 
 
5.0 
Statutory Business 
 
5.1       Corporate Affairs and Governance 
 
5.1.1 To consider the Investigation Report by the Standards in Public Office Commission in respect of 
former Councillor Tommy Reilly 
 
The Chief Executive advised that in accordance with Section 180 (3)(a) of the Local Government Act 2001, the 
Standards in Public Office Commission Report was furnished to The Cathaoirleach and Chief Executive, and a copy 
of the report was circulated to the Elected Members.  It was noted that in accordance with Section 180(4)( a) the 
Elected Members were required to consider the report.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
The Chief Executive noted that, although the Council was not the subject of the report, the comments had been 
considered, and revised procedures have been put in place regarding note-taking at pre-planning meetings. 
  
There were interventions from Councillors Brian Fitzgerald, Gerry O’Connor, Maria White, Nick Killian, Padraig 
Coffey, Emer Tóibín, and David Gilroy.  Primarily, the members acknowledged that the report had been duly 
considered.  Some concerns were expressed regarding the findings presented in the report.  It was noted that the 
Council had no authority to impose sanctions on a private citizen.     
 
 
5.1.2 To receive a verbal update on Local Government Task Force 
 
Councillor Joe Fox provided an overview of the Taskforce in Local Government.  He outlined details of the four 
specialist pillar groups: 
 
Governance and Accountability 
Structures 
Funding and Financial Autonomy 
Functions and Devolution 
 
He further noted that the Taskforce has carried out a sector consultation programme and will produce a detailed 
Issues and Option paper, setting out practical reform choices in governance, funding, structures and functions 
devolution. 
 
 
5.1.3 To receive an update on activities of Meath Women's Caucus. 
 
Councillor Maria Murphy, Chairperson of Meath Women’s Caucus provided an update of the activities of Meath 
Women’s Caucus. The update outlined details of the recent AGM and the work programme for the forthcoming 
year. 
 
5.2 Finance 
5.2.1 To note the Quarterly Financial Statement as of 30th September 2025. 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
5.3 Transport 
5.3.1 To consider Meath County Council Road Safety Plan 2025 – 2027 
 
Ms. Audrey Norris, Road Safety Officer, delivered the presentation on Meath County Council Road Safety Plan 
2025-2027.  She noted that Meath County Council is implementing the Government’s Road Safety Strategy 2021–
2030, aiming to cut road fatalities and serious injuries by 50% by 2030.  A key initiative is the Safe Routes to School 
programme, which improves school access and cycling infrastructure, front-of-school treatments, and expanded 
bike parking.  
 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Eugene Cassidy, Joe Fox, Maria Murphy, Ronan Moore, 
Noel French, Emer Toibin, Alan Lawes, Eddie Fennessy, Nick Killian, Padraig Fitzsimons, Maria White and An 
Cathaoirleach. Matters raised included:  Bus it to school to programme, road safety promotion and 
communications, roll out of average speed cameras, driver behaviour and education, active travel initiatives, HGVs 
on local roads, reporting of RTCs, Just 1 Life Programme, enforcement, driving under the influence of alcohol 
and/or drugs, increased use of e-bikes and e-scooters and the requirements for the use of high-viz clothing. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
The Meath County Council Road Safety Plan 2025 – 2027 was approved on the proposal of Councillor Emer Tóibin, 
seconded by Councillor Alan Lawes and unanimously agreed. 
 
5.4 
Planning 
5.4.1 
In accordance with Section 10.3.1 of the Development Plan Guidelines for Planning 
Authorities (2022), to receive the Annual Development Plan Monitoring Report for 
Year 4 of the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 2027 (as varied). 
 
Mr. Alan Russell, Senior Planner, delivered a presentation on the Annual Development Plan Monitoring Report for 
Year 4 of the Meath County Development Plan 2021 – 2027 (as varied). 
 
There were interventions and queries from Councillors Brian Fitzgerald and Michael Gallagher.  The members 
welcomed the report. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
6.0 
Reports 
 
6.1 
Management Report 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Nick Killian, Eddie Fennessy, Stephen McKee, Yvonne Everard, Joe Fox 
and Emer Tóibin.  Matters raised include: 
 
Transport: 
Phase 2 N51,  
 
Housing:  
HAP Applications, affordable housing, housing at Churchview Rathmolyon, retrofits,  
 
Tourism:  
Boyne Greenway to Drogheda,  
 
 
6.2 
Report from Corporate Policy Group 
 
The Meetings Administrator provided an update on the recent CPG meeting held on Tuesday, November 25th. 
During the meeting, Members discussed the draft agenda and outlined the arrangements for the upcoming 
December Council Meeting. 
 
The draft minutes of Forward Planning & Development Management SPC, 3rd October 2025 and the Climate 
Action, Environment and Emergency Services SPC of 28th October 2025 were noted and these have been uploaded 
to the Resources Section on Decision Time. 
 
It was agreed that a workshop will be held with the Elected Members on the implementation, locally, of the 
Government’s Housing Action Plan, Delivering Homes, Building Communities 2025-2030. 
 
And finally, Conference and Training Schedules were approved, and these have been circulated to the Members. 
 
 
7.0 
Correspondence 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
8.0 
Notice of Question 
 
8.1 
Submitted by Councillor Sarah Reilly 
 
"That the Housing Section provide a breakdown of the percentage of refusals they have received 
year on year since the introduction of the CBL system. That the information be provided in tabular 
format differentiating between the percentage of refusals per house size and MD and that a 
comparison be made with the number of refusals received prior to the introduction of the CBL 
system." 
 
Response: 
 
Based on the information available to hand, the following data on refusals is as below 
 
In summation – for the information that is available from 20/9/23 only. 
 
2023 Refusals totals are 18 – no detail in terms of CBL. (NB – data from 20/9/23 only available) 
2024 Refusals 111 - of which 24 are CBL 
2025 Refusals 64 up to 18/8/25 
 
The Housing Section is currently reviewing how refusals are recorded and how this data can be 
better captured. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
8.2 
Submitted by Councillor Helen Meyer 
 
"To inquire about the criteria the Council uses to assess requests for the change of use of a house 
in a residential estate to allow Tusla to provide 24-hour residential care services for minors. 
Additionally, what follow-up inspections are conducted to ensure compliance with these 
criteria?" 
 
Response: 
 
Any application for change of use is assessed in accordance with the prescriptions under the 
Planning and Development Acts 2000-2024. It should be noted that there are exemptions for 
certain residencies under Class 14(f) of Part 1 of Schedule 2 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 as amended, (there is an exemption from the need for 
planning permission for the change of use of a house to a residence for up to six people with 
an intellectual or physical disability or mental illness, and for up to two resident carers.) 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
 
8.3 
Submitted by Councillor Emer Tóibin 
 
“To ask Meath County Council to provide a full update on the operation of the Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant in County Meath since its introduction, including a year-by-year and 
Municipal District breakdown of: 
 
Applications received, approved, refused, withdrawn, and those currently pending; 
The number of grants fully drawn down, i.e. properties completed and brought back into 
use 
The total value of funding approved and the total value drawn down.” 
 
Response: 
 
The response to the Notice of Question is as below and attached. 
 
There is a website page with information in relation to the scheme (FAQ’S / Scheme outline 
etc) and from January 2026 an online application portal will be in operation. 
 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
 
9.0 
Notice of Motion 
 
9.1 
Submitted by Councillor Edward Fennessy 
 
“To request Meath County Council to write to the NTA and Iarnród Éireann requesting a shuttle 
bus service between Navan and the M3 Parkway train station at Dunboyne. This service would 
be a temporary measure until Navan rail project is approved.” 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
Requests in relation to the provision of bus services should be directed to the NTA in the first 
instance, however, if this motion is passed the Council will write to the NTA and Iarnrod 
Eireann accordingly. 
 
Councillor Edward Fennessy introduced the motion. He noted the importance of rail access to Meath. He 
further noted that such improvements would contribute to greater transportation efficiency, reduce the 
carbon footprint, and help alleviate traffic congestion. There were interventions of support from 
Councillors Nick Killian, Emer Toibin and Maria Murphy. 
 
The motion, together with supporting information, was unanimously agreed on the proposal of 
Councillor Edward Fennessy and seconded by Councillor Fionnan Blake. 
 
 
9.2 
Submitted by Councillor Maria White 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
"To call on Meath County Council to abolish the requirement for audited accounts in the 
assessment of self-employed applicants for social housing support and, instead adopt a 
more equitable and discretionary approach to income verification." 
 
Supporting Information subject to the motion being proposed, seconded and considered: 
 
The Housing Department can confirm that as part of the checklist of documents for the self-
employed there is a requirement for submission of a minimum of 2 years’ accounts with an 
Auditor’s Report and a Notice of Assessment and/or Self-Assessment Acknowledgement letter 
for the preceding 12 months. It is acknowledged that for governance of business proposes there 
is no legal requirement for a sole trader to engage an accountant or tax advisor to sign off or 
audit their accounts, however the Council position is that there is nothing preventing them from 
being audited. It is accepted that there is a cost for the sole trader involved in this however 
providing access to Social Housing Support confers a significant level of state support, as such 
audited accounts are required to verify income information from sole traders. In exceptional 
circumstances where such documents cannot be produced the Council may use its discretion on 
a case by case basis. 
 
 
The motion was proposed by Councillor Maria White and seconded by Councillor Peter Caffrey. 
 
Councillor Maria White introduced the motion. She noted the prohibitive costs associated with audited 
accounts. 
 
There were interventions from Councillors Sean Drew, Gerry O`Connor, Maria Murphy and Noel French.  
The Members broadly welcomed the motion however, it was noted that the matter should be fully 
considered by the Housing and Integration SPC.   
 
It was unanimously agreed by the Elected Members to refer the motion to the Housing and Integration 
SPC for further consideration. 
 
10.0       General Interest Motions 
There was none. 
 
11.0 
Schedule of Chief Executive & Approved Orders (For Information Only) 
 
                11.1  
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Transportation 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
                11.2 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Environment 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
                11.3 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Housing 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí/ Meeting Minutes 
                11.4 
Schedule of Chief Executive’s Orders – Community 
Noted by the Elected Members. 
 
12.0     Any Other Business 
 
Councillor Peter Caffrey noted the recent financial difficulties of Navan Mental Health Centre and urged 
Councillors to provide funding as part of the discretionary allowance if they were in a position to do so. 
 
The meeting concluded at 15.50pm 
 
 
 
 
